Just Add Consciousness:
A Guide to Social Activism

Activist strategies for:
• Making your
voice heard
• Mobilizing people
to take action
• Educating your
community
• Influencing key
decision makers
• Changing local and
national politics
• Making our world
a better place

Oxfam America seeks
lasting solutions to poverty,
hunger, and social injustice
around the world.

Campus Outreach Opportunity
League (COOL) seeks to educate
and empower college students to
strengthen our nation
through community service.

Action Without Borders connects
people, organizations, and
resources to help build a world
where all people can live free and
dignified lives.

Bread for the World is a
grassroots movement that seeks
justice for hungry people
bylobbying our nation’s
decision makers.
Bread for the World
Seeking Justice. Ending Hunger.

Table of Contents
Introduction 1
Letter Writing Campaign 2
Meet with Your Member of Congress 5
Phone Calling Campaign 6
Time Your Message 7
Use the Media 8
Organize a Teach-In 10
Organize a Demonstration 11
Creative Action 13
Cyber Activism 15
Finance Your Activist Projects 16
Publicity 17
:

Just Add Consciousness: A Guide to Social Activism provides some basic
strategies for activism. Before using any of these strategies, be sure that your
group/organization has already done some groundwork, including researching
and educating yourselves on the issue; identifying key people and institutions you are aiming
to influence; setting clear, focused, and realistic goals and objectives; and creating strategic
alliances. If your group needs help with these initial stages, check out Alliance for Justice’s
(afj.org) training and action guide Co/Motion Guide to Youth-Led Social Change.
Once you decide which activist strategies you will use to realize your goals, we suggest that
you evaluate your progress as you proceed. Continuous evaluation will allow you to be more
open to changing your strategies if you realize they are not working. (For more information,

see Advocacy Campaigns: Influencing Organi-
zational Decision Making, Oxfam America.)

Just Add Consciousness: A Guide to Social
Activism was compiled by three activists: Liz Carty,
Oxfam America; Stephanie Seidel, Bread for the
World; and Jane Fleming, Campus Outreach
Opportunity League (recently merged with Action
Without Borders—Idealist.org). They consulted the
following organizations and thank each individual
for believing in and living this work every day:
Action Without Borders (idealist.org), Alliance
for Justice (afj.org), American Civil Liberties Union
(aclu.org), American Jewish World Service (ajws.org), Break Away (alternativebreaks.com),
Center of Concern (coc.org), Civic Direct, Inc. (civicdirect.com), Co-op America
(coopamerica.org), Davey D/FNV (daveyd.com), Direct Action Network, Fairness and Accuracy
In Reporting (fair.org), Foundation Center (foundationcenter.org), Global Exchange
(globalexchange.org), Hillel (hillel.org), Independent Media Sector (indymedia.org),
International Development Exchange (idex.org), JustAct (justact.org), National Coalition for
the Homeless (nch.ari.net), National Peace Corps Association (rpcv.org), National Student
Campaign Against Hunger and Homelessness (nscahh.org), NETWORK (networklobby.org),
PAX (paxusa.org), No More Prisons (nomoreprisons.net), Power to the Youth (youthpower.net),
Project Vote-Smart (vote-smart.org), Protest (protest.net), Rosenberg Fund for Children
(rfc.org), Ruckus (ruckus.org), Self-Education Foundation (selfeducation.org), Student
Alliance to Reform Corporations/STARC (corpreform.org), Students United for a Responsible
Global Environment /SURGE (surgenetwork.org), United for a Fair Economy (ufenet.org),

United Students Against Sweat Shops (usasnet.org), Voter.com, War Resisters League (nonvio-
lence.org/wrl), Wise Fool Community Arts (zeitgeist.net/wfca/wisefool.htm ), Youth for Envi-
ronmental Sanity (yesworld.org), Youth In Action Campaign (youthlink.org), and Youth

Service America (ysa.org).
Letter

“The activist movement isn’t about an issue for me.
It isn’t about justice or peace or freedom or equality.
It’s about our very survival. The challenge before us as
a human race in ensuring our own continuation is the
most difficult challenge that has ever faced anyone in
the history of life on Earth. Want a challenge?”
—from No More Prisons, by William Upski Wimsatt

1

Letter
Writing
Campaign

It only takes a piece of paper and a pen to be an effective advocate. People often ask, “Will my
letter make a difference?” Yes, it will! Congressional staff members say all it takes are 10-20
handwritten letters to draw their attention to an issue.
Since writing a letter only takes a few minutes and requires limited supplies, it is the perfect
advocacy tool to take anywhere on campus or in your community. Write letters at a group meeting,
after class, or at a related event. National, state, and local organizations that follow the issues you
care about can provide helpful information such as sample letters and fact sheets. Also, check out

the Cyber Activism section of this guide for information on how to effectively use email to commu-
nicate with legislators.

As an active young person, you can write to the representatives of your school’s district and state,
or of your hometown. Check out the web sites listed in the reference section below to find your

members of Congress by zip code. At a campus-wide letter writing table, do not worry about know-
ing the address of each member of Congress. Students can always write to the representative and

senators from their school’s district and state.
For more targeted letters, write to your representatives who are on key committees. Web sites—
including the ones listed on the reference section on page 4—and congressional guides in public
libraries list on which committees each member of Congress serves on as well as explaining the
function of each committee. Do not be tempted to write to a key representative to whom you have
no connections. Many congressional offices disregard mail that is not from a student or constituent
in their district or state.
Most congressional offices respond to handwritten letters with information about their positions
on the issue. If your elected official is not supportive, find answers to his/her concerns. If your
representative takes your recommended action, write a thank you note. It shows you care enough to
watch how your representative responds. Be sure to stay in touch with them throughout the year,
track the progress of your issue in Congress, and let them know you voted on election day!
Important contact information:
Representative ___________
U.S. House of Representatives
Washington, DC 20515
Senator ___________
U.S. Senate
Washington, DC 20510
Capitol Switchboard: 202/224-3121
President
The White House
1600 Pennsylvania Ave., NW
Washington, DC 20500
White House Comment Line: 202/456-1111

2
Congressional staff members
say all it takes are 10-20
handwritten letters to draw
their attention to an issue.

On election day,
vote!

Tips:
1.Always start with the proper title:
Honorable or Representative/Senator.

2. Be brief and courteous. Many effec-
tive letters are only 4 to 5 sentences

long. If you can, begin your letter by
thanking your representative for a

recent vote or speech that you appre-
ciated. Check out voting records to

find out about how elected officials
have voted.
3. Time your message to be most
effective. The legislative process
chart on page 7 shows at what key
times to write your letters to have
the most impact.

4. Be specific. Identify the partic-
ular legislative proposal you are

writing about and briefly explain
why you want your representative
to support or oppose it.
5. Write your own letter and
personally sign it. Think about
what makes you change your
mind on an issue. It is not
always the fact-filled argument,
but a concerned person who

shared his/her own experi-
ences and observations.

6. Put your return address on
the letter as well as on the
envelope. Most congressional
offices respond to constituent
mail with a letter. Your
address shows your member
of Congress that you are a

constituent, as either a stu-
dent in the congressional

district or state, or a regis-
tered voter there.

The Honorable Robert Smith
US House of Representatives
Washington, DC 20515
Dear Representative Smith (1):
Thank you for supporting the recent House
legislation to increase the minimum wage by
$1 over two years (2). As you know, the
debate is not over yet (3). In this critical
time,
I urge you to continue to push for passage of
an increase in the minimum wage of at least
$1 over the next two years (4).
One in ten households in the U.S. cannot
afford the food their families need. In my

work at Shepherd’s Table in southwest Hous-
ton, I have met many hard working families

whose full time job does not make ends meet
(5). A higher minimum wage would help these
families make work pay and put food on their
tables.
Your leadership on these issues is very
important. I look forward to working with you
to help end hunger in our world.
Sincerely,
Ann McCurry
123 Stella Link

3

References:
voter.com provides voting records of candidates and current political information/research.
vote-smart.orgis a non-partisan organization that tracks voting records and contact information.
thomas.loc.govsupplies research on specific legislation. It is a service of the Library of Congress.
networklobby.orgincludes tools for lobbying Congress and local elected officials, as well as the
steps to a bill becoming a law.
rpcv.orgis the web site of the National Peace Corps Association. It has tools and contacts for elected
officials.
bread.orgis the web site for Bread for the World, a grassroots advocacy organization that tracks
hunger-related legislation and shows how members of Congress are voting on key issues.
paxusa.orgis a site on ending gun violence. It includes tools for advocacy.

Do you have other
web links that can help
your fellow activists?
Email them to
action@oxfamamerica.org.

After educating ourselves as a group on the issue, we plan our letter-writing cam-
paign about a month in advance. We set up our letter writing table for three consecu-
tive days, usually Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday. We set the table outside, or just

inside, a different building each day for about four hours during a popular time.
At the table, we are always sure to have plenty of paper, pens, envelopes, sample
letters (which should only be about a paragraph or two), clipboards, and several lists
of representatives and senators by state. We make posters with facts and a sample
letter around the table to attract attention to it. Making sure no one can pass the table
without looking at it is key.
We always have two volunteers behind the table coordinating and distributing the
materials and answering questions. The volunteers behind the table make the letter
writing campaign run smoothly and without confusion.
We also have at least two to three volunteers in front of the table, with clipboards
and paper in hand, actively approaching people. The volunteers in front of the table
are crucial to getting a high number of letters. If people aren’t asked to write, they will
most likely not ask what is going on. An effective way to confront people is to
approach confidently, use a friendly smile, explain the issue in one to two sentences,

and then ask if they could take the minute to write a letter. We continuously empha-
size to everyone that their letter can make a difference in the lives of hungry people.

Young people are unfortunately the ones who don’t vote because they feel that they
cannot make a difference.
One last piece of advice for your letter writing campaign: never sit! Those working
the campaign are supposed to be the ones most committed to the campaign, and
most excited to be a part of it.
Terry Mambu
Villanova University

4

Meet
with Your
Member of
Congress

On election day,
vote!

Few actions can match the effectiveness of meeting with your member of Congress face-to-
face, whether in their Washington office, district office, or at a community forum. Elected

officials are strongly affected by the opinions of constituents who are committed enough to a specific
concern to arrange a visit.
Tips:
• Call your representative’s appointment secretary to schedule a meeting time. Tell the scheduler
what topic(s) you want to cover and be sure to mention how many people you are expecting to
attend the visit. Some congressional offices are small. If you are bringing a large group, the office
staff may need to prepare an alternative meeting space. Small groups are okay; you do not need to
promise a crowd.
• Organize a diverse group from your campus’ congressional district to attend. Consider what may

help persuade your representative. For example, if your member of Congress has a particular reli-
gious persuasion, invite prominent community leaders from that faith tradition to accompany you

on the visit.

• You do not have to be a policy expert, but you do have to be well-prepared. You should be conver-
sant with the main points of the legislation you are addressing without engaging congressional

staff in a heated debate. Prepare main talking points that are key to your position.
• Ask for your member of Congress to take a specific action. As an active citizen, you may be tempted
to bring many issues into your visit, but you will be more effective in your visit if you focus on one
or two main issues.
• You may meet with a legislative aide instead of your representative. Aides are usually well-informed
and offer critical advice that will help shape the congressperson’s position on a range of issues.
• You may only have a few minutes with the member of Congress or aide, so keep it short and stick to
your talking points. If you have more time, you can discuss additional points about the issue and
hear his/her views and opinions.
• After your visit, stay in touch with the office by sending a thank-you note. This is your opportunity
to build a relationship with your member of Congress. Follow-up in a timely manner with any
requested materials and information. If the member of Congress commits to take a specific action,
keep an eye on it.

Representative Richard Neal (D-MA) cosponsored important hunger-fighting legislation after a

visit from a small group of students from Mt. Holyoke College. While many students serve in emer-
gency relief agencies during alternative spring breaks, these students decided to add to their valu-
able community service a day to help create the political will to address hunger through targeted

political action.
After the visit, Anita Magovern, Coordinator of Community Service at Mt. Holyoke College, said,
“A lobbyist is somebody with a message to share who is organized to share it. Everyone has the
right to speak out.” The experience made her realize that any group can lobby.
Though Rep. Neal was aware of the legislation, he had not taken action on the bill. The group
asked Rep. Neal to show his support for the legislation by becoming a cosponsor. A long list of
bipartisan cosponsors demonstrates support for legislation before it comes up for a vote and can
help move the legislation forward. At the end of the visit, Rep. Neal committed to being a cosponsor.
This effective visit did not happen by accident. Careful preparation helped the group educate
Rep. Neal about the legislation and effectively persuade him to support the bill. Prior to their visit, the
group met with Bread for the World (a grassroots anti-hunger movement) to learn the details of the
legislation, like current cosponsors and bill numbers. They also role-played the visit to plan who
would make each important point.
The students from Mt. Holyoke College played a crucial role in pushing legislation forward that
can help thousands of families put food on their tables and end hunger in their homes.

5

Phone
Calling
Campaign

Sometimes legislation moves so quickly on Capitol Hill that there is no time to write
letters or arrange a visit; in that case, telephone calls are a fast and personal way to
express your concerns.
Tips:
• Call your member of Congress at his/her Washington, DC, office.
• Identify yourself and your affiliation (your school, group name, or your hometown.)
• Ask to speak with the member of Congress or the legislative aide handling the issue. If neither person
is available, leave a message with your name, address, and phone number with the receptionist.
• If you are generating numerous calls, ask callers to leave a message with the receptionist. Since you
are trying to make a positive relationship with the staff, you don’t want to overload the legislative
aide with too many calls. A few callers can contact the aide to let him/her know that there are
many messages with the receptionist about the issue.
• Keep your message brief. Like an effective letter, be sure to make a specific request of your
representative.
• Be prepared to have background information on your issue available to send to the office if there
are any questions. Contact organizations like Bread for the World and Oxfam America that follow
the issues you care about for helpful resources.
To generate a persuasive number of calls, form a telephone-tree network of activists to pass a message

along to the member of Congress at crucial times in the legislative process. Every person on the net-
work delivers a suggested message to the congressional office. This flood of calls can sway an undecid-
ed vote or convince a legislator who wonders where the public stands on the issue.

Setting up a Phone Tree:
1. Choose a coordinator to maintain and activate the phone tree. This person will pass along the
message to several key people, who will continue to pass the message on to other members.
2. Make a list of the current phone numbers of your members.
3. Select a few key people to be responsible for calling up to 10 people.
4. Give these key people the names and phone numbers of members to be called.
5. Be sure to pass along a short and concise message. Since the message will go through the tree, it
needs to be clear enough for everyone to write it down and repeat it to the congressional office.
6. Keep your phone tree current and working. After the phone tree has been activated, the last person
on the tree should call the coordinator to verify the message made it through the network.

Do you have other
web links that can help
your fellow activists?
Email them to
action@oxfamamerica.org.

6

Coordinator calls 3 key people.
Key person calls 4 members, plus 1 other key person.
(3 key people and 12 members notified).
Key person calls 4 members, plus 1 other key person.
Key person calls 5 members; 49 members notified in all.

Time Your
Message

On election day,
vote!

Whether you are doing a letter writing campaign, activating a phone tree, or visiting
with your member of Congress, be sure to time your action to have the most impact.
You can exert the most influence by taking action at these key points in the legislative process:
• Before a bill is introduced, you can help generate support for the legislation and urge your
member of Congress to be a sponsor of the bill.
• When a bill is introduced, urge your representative to cosponsor. As a cosponsor, your member
of Congress can show his/her support for the bill before it comes up for a vote. A long list of
both Republicans and Democrats shows broad and unified support for a bill.
• A key stage in the legislative process is when a committee or subcommittee is marking up
the bill, which means they are considering the individual provisions and making requested
changes. If your member of Congress is on the committee or subcommittee, be sure to voice
your opinion about provisions you would like to have removed or changed.
• When the bill goes to the House or Senate floor for a final vote, urge your members of Congress
to support it or oppose it.
• For the status of the bill you are following, check out vote-smart.com, voter.com,
thomas.loc.gov, and organizational web sites that track the issue you care about like
bread.org, nomoreprisons.net, and justact.org.

7

Use the
Media

Basic Tips for Working with the Media
• Develop and maintain a “press list” (which consists of the reporter’s name, title, address, phone
number, email, fax number, deadlines). Be sure to include: wire service (Independent Media,
United Press International, Reuters), local and regional newspapers/magazines, local “’zines,”
local TV news and talk shows, local cable stations, special interest publications (ethnic, college,
high-school, religious, punk, trade, professional).
• Meet with reporters, DJs, talk show hosts, and editors personally—develop the relationship and
establish rapport. See where their interests lie. Follow-up with phone calls to give them story ideas
or to give them an update on your program.
• Read reporters’ stories. Give them feedback—make them aware you are reading, watching, and
listening to them. By reading their stories you will know whom to contact for your media outreach.

• Be prepared to give reporters facts, accurate information, quotes, historical background informa-
tion, and if possible an “exclusive,” meaning they are the reporter breaking the news.

• Return reporters’ calls as soon as possible.
• Use all the “free” resources the media offers, such as the calendar column, letters to the editor,
Op-Ed articles, and Public Service Announcements.
Letters to the Editor
Letters to the Editor represent your perspective in the local newspaper and can be a counter argument
for articles that you do not agree with. They also:
• reach a large audience;
• are monitored by elected officials and other decision-makers; and
• create an impression of widespread support for or against an issue.
Be Direct
Make one point (or at most two) in your letter. Because letters are often edited, state the point clearly
in the first paragraph. Start with a catchy opening and use the active tense.
Be Timely
Address a specific article, editorial, or letter that recently appeared in the paper you are writing to or
a recent event. Refer to the title, date, and author of the piece you are agreeing with or disputing.
Support Your Facts
If the topic you address is controversial, consider sending documentation along with your letter—
but do not overload the editors with too much information. Refute or support specific statements,
address relevant facts that are ignored, and avoid attacking the reporter or the newspaper.
Local Angle
To explain the issue’s local or personal impact, look at the letters that appear in your paper—is a
certain type of letter usually printed?
Know Your Audience
Familiarize yourself with the coverage and editorial position of the paper. Be professional—this is
not a letter to a friend. Write for the community who reads the paper (do not try to discuss technical
terms if the audience will not know the technicalities of the issue).
Maximize Use of the Letter

Send the letter to neighborhood, alternative, high school, and college papers—the smaller the pub-
lication the more likely it will get published. Get others to write letters—if your letter does not get

published, perhaps someone else’s letter on the same topic will.
Logistics
Check and adhere to the newspaper’s letter specifications, especially regarding word limits. Write in
short paragraphs (3 sentences long), find out the editor’s name, include your contact information
(name, address, phone number, email), type or email the letter.

Op-Ed Pieces are a highly
effective way of expressing your
opinion in the newspaper. Op-Eds
are opinion pieces that appear
opposite editorial pages. They are

persuasive, well thought-out, well-
written, short in length (usually

about 800 words)—but longer
than a letter to the editor, and
authored by a high-profile person
or someone who has experience

with the issue. The published op-
ed should be timely, and present

a strong, well-informed position,
supported by facts.

8

Press Releases
A press release is a full and succinct account of your story/event, usually one or two pages, and should
be written as a news article. Press releases help editors write an article. In fact, some small community
newspapers will actually print your press release “as is.”
• The first paragraph is the lead. It is one to three sentences long and answers “who, what, when,
where, why, and how?” The lead must grab the editor’s attention.
• The second paragraph is the bridge. It provides the source and a transition for the more detailed
information.
• The third paragraph is the body. The information given in the lead is explained in detail in the body.
Add quotations, facts not included in the lead, and general information on the organization.
• Add a photograph to grab attention.
• Follow-up with a phone call and/or personal visit—it may increase their interest in the story.
Logistics
Type the release, double-spaced, on letterhead with wide margins. At the top include the name and
phone numbers for the contact person, the date and time for the story’s release, and a short headline.
When there is more than one page type “—more—” at the bottom except for the last page. On the

last page type “###” or “—END—.” Fax the release to a reporter with whom you have a relation-
ship or to the editor.

Public Service Announcements
Public Service Announcements (PSAs) are short messages that radio and television stations air free of
charge on behalf of community organizations. Contact your local public service directors at the television
and radio stations serving your area for the exact requirements of placing a PSA. They may even be able to
help you produce the PSA.
• PSAs are designed to be heard. It must be personal and have a sense of immediacy.
• Make the PSA catchy to grab the interest and attention of the target audience.
• Use active voice and present tense when possible.
• Inform listeners/viewers how they can contact your organization—include your phone number
and web site. Be prepared for increased calls.
• Include accurate facts, dates, and names. Answer the questions “who, what, why, when,
where, and how?”
• Read it aloud—does it read smoothly? Are the words too difficult to pronounce?
• Fit your message to the time slot: on average, 10 seconds=25 words, 30 seconds=75 words,
60 seconds=150 words.
• Send a thank-you letter to the public service director and/or the DJ or TV host that airs the PSA—
ask your friends to do the same. They like positive feedback!
Television Stories
Television stories are short and simple. Complex stories are usually reduced to 30 or 60 second segments.
• The assignment editor decides on the day’s coverage the day before or on the day itself (call before 4 pm).
• Hold events before 3 pm in order to be included in that day’s coverage.
References:
indymedia.orgfor connecting to the independent media outlets.
fair.orgfor media tips and lists of alternative media outlets—click on the “activism” button.
aclu.orgfor sample letters to the editor and media tips.
oxfamamerica.orgfor sample press releases and media tips.

Sample PSA Script on
“Driving While Black”
Guy #1: Aw, man!
Guy #2: What?
Guy #1: The police are following us.
Guy #2:You sure?
Guy #1: Everywhere I go, they’re
there, I’m telling you.
Guy #2: Alright, be cool. Hold on . . .
why are we scared? We didn’t do
anything wrong.
Guy #1:Yeah. So why’re they pulling
us over?
Announcer: The sight of a police car
shouldn’t scare you. Driving while
black or brown isn’t against the law,
but police officers stopping drivers
because of the color of their skin. In
one case it was found that minorities
made up only 16 percent of drivers,
but were 74 percent of those stopped
and searched. Enough! Call the ACLU
hotline and tell us your story at 877/6-
PROFILE. Together we have the
power to help end discrimination by
the police. Let’s arrest racism.

Do you have other
web links that can help
your fellow activists?
Email them to
action@oxfamamerica.org.

9

Organize
a Teach-In Visualize young people gathering in a church or a community center in the 1960s to listen
to Dr. Howard Thurman and Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., teaching how to organize and
describing the underlying issues of racism. They were doing teach-ins—probably the most successful
teach-ins of the last century. It’s your turn now!
1. Decide what you want to do. This will depend upon your audience and how ambitious you are.
You can show a movie, invite a speaker, have a forum of students and professors, or do a workshop
on a specific skill or topic. You can even do all of these over a few days and call it a conference.
The student group, STARC (corpreform.org), likes to host a two part series—the first time they
show a video and then they host an interactive workshop on direct action tactics.
2. Reserve a room, confirm the speakers (have a back-up plan in case they do not show), check to
make sure you are not competing with a concert or other popular event, get a visual aid (video,
flip charts), make (or order from a national organization) educational pamphlets, and get food
and drinks.
3. Get the word out! Why bother organizing a teach-in if no one comes? Set an attendance goal. Put up
posters or write the information with chalk on sidewalks or chalkboards. Gather up your friends.
Go to other meetings where people might be interested in the topic and tell them about the teach-in.
Ask professors to give extra credit for attending the teach-in and writing a paper for class.
4. Create your agenda. Make your teach-in fun and interactive. Do a fun icebreaker to get the
teach-in started.
5. Do the teach-in! Get people’s contact information to keep them informed on next steps. Have at
least one way they can immediately take action. For example, send on-line faxes before they leave
or check out the Letter Writingsection.

Other Forms of Teach-Ins
Open Mikes and Speak-Outs
are great ways to maximize young
people’s voices on controversial issues
and to encourage them to exercise their
rights to free speech (find out if your
campus has a “free speech zone”).
Common areas like the cafeteria are the
perfect setting. The downside to this
activity is the lack of control. Having a
clear message will help, but remember
that you want people to express their
views. Keep in mind the noise you will
create and make sure you are not
disruptive to others.
Debates & Panel Discussions
get both sides of the issue represented,
so include young people from all walks
of life. Make sure you truly have all
points of view equally represented.
For both Open Mikes/Speak Outs and
Debates/Discussions, be respectful of
opposing views.

Agenda for Make Trade Fair Teach-in on Trade Agreements
Introductions: Have everyone say who they are and one word that describes why they are at the
teach-in. (10 minutes)
One thing you know: Have participants state one thing they know about NAFTA (North
America Free Trade Agreement). (10 minutes)
Educate: Review the notes on the flip chart about the main components of Trade Agreements
that the US is currently negotiating. (Example: Explain how trade agreements will affect
agriculture, access to medicines, the environment, and labor.)(20 minutes)
Video: Show “Trade Secrets: the Hidden Cost of the FTAA.” Contact Global Exchange for a
copy. (20 minutes)
Small Groups: Break into groups of four and discuss what you thought about the video and
the role of the US in setting global trade rules. (10 minutes)
Brainstorm: Regroup and list action steps that you can take to combat the negative effects of
unfair trade rules. (15 minutes)
Next Steps: Decide how you can work together in the future and develop a listserv to stay
connected. Contact Oxfam America (maketradefair@oxfamamerica.org) for more information
and to let us know what you are doing; also see our website for more trade resources.
Source: www.oxfamamerica.org See Oxfam’s website for a sample teach-in on Free Trade
Agreements and accompanying power point presentation.
References:
protest.net has background information on activism and international action updates.
oxfamamerica.org has an active eCommunity that sends action alerts to members; these actions
focus on pressing international justice issues.

Do you have other
web links that can help
your fellow activists?
Email them to
action@oxfamamerica.org.
10

Organize a
Demonstration

Young people, like those pictured below, take an active role in planning and participating

in large scale demonstrations, like the Millennium March. Smaller demonstrations hap-
pen dailyon campuses and in local communities. The book The Future is Oursby John W. Bartlett

(netspace.org/future/) suggests keeping the following in mind when deciding on what type of
demonstration to hold: you rally for something you support and you protest against something
you oppose.
Vigil: Typically a quiet event at night with candles to honor and remember lost lives or victims.
Example: Take Back the Night.
Sit-In: Occupying a public or private space, typically a decision maker’s office. The protesters make a
demand and do not leave until the demand is met or negotiated. Example: holding a sit-in at your
university’s president’s office because of sweat-shop labor being used to make your school’s apparel.

March:A group of people, holding signs and chanting, walk from a designated point to a commu-
nal destination in order for a message to be conveyed to the public and decision makers. Example:

Million Man March.
Picket Line: People, holding signs and chanting, march outside a building or office. Example:
Union workers on strike.
Protesting Sweatshop Labor
Putting pressure on the university administration to ban sweatshop labor from being used to
produce campus products at Georgetown University really gained momentum when a student
from the university visited a factory in Latin America and saw a cap with the Georgetown

logo. Student activist Michael Levinson said, “The sit-in at the president’s office that we organ-
ized came after months of educating ourselves, the campus, and the administration about the

issues. We won full public disclosure, meaning that we know the locations of the factories that
are making Georgetown apparel. We also created a ‘code of conduct’ that all of our vendors
must agree to follow.” To date, more than 80 campuses have had similar success.

11

All types of demonstrations require planning. A demonstration needs to be part of an overall strategy.
Keep these tips in mind:
Core group of organizers:Assign specific roles to people, such as media, outreach, permit
coordinator, and publicity manager.
Turnout: Numbers are important because the public and the media look to the number of people
you can mobilize and equate that to the level of support you have for your issue. Develop a specific
strategy, including a goal for the number of people you will recruit to attend the demonstration.
Check out the Publicitysection for ideas on recruiting people.

Permits and Officials: Know your rights regarding use of space on campus or in the commu-
nity. Gather all necessary permits so the protest is not shut down for a logistical reason. Talk to

the campus or community police about the demonstration. If you are planning to risk arrest, have
trained legal observers at the event to take notes. The ACLU (aclu.org) is extremely helpful in
clarifying your rights and responsibilities.
Equipment: Make sure you have everything you need (megaphones, poster board, first aid kit,
tarps for rain, information flyers) and that the electrical and sound equipment works.
Press Packets: Prepare folders for the press with detailed fact sheets, letters to the editor your
group wrote, press releases, and recommendations for a solution to the issue for which you are
rallying. Make sure you include a one-pager with major points for those reporters that need a
quick reference. See the Media section for more tips.
Slogans and Chanting: Come up with catchy slogans the group can quickly learn and chant
loudly. You do not want to sound belligerent. Keep in mind that people passing by are people you
want to educate, not alienate.
Signs: Make signs that have bold letters and a clear message. Most passersby do not have the time
or inclination to stop and chat with demonstrators, so it is important that your signs catch their

attention and send a clear message. Once you catch someone’s attention, they are more likely to lis-
ten to the facts or receive a fact sheet.

Puppets:Life-size puppets dramatize your issue and serves as a great visual for the media while
the demonstration is happening. See the resource section for more information.
Speakers: Gather a diverse group of people to speak, including those who are directly affected by

the issue, young and old people, as well as people of color, all levels of education, or varying physi-
cal abilities (make sure they have accessibility). Give short time slots for each speaker—this is a

demonstration, not a teach-in.
Timing: Hold your demonstration around a time when decision makers will be near you, for
example, at a convention.
Weather: Consider a back-up plan if your demonstration is scheduled to be outside. Assign a rain
date on all your flyers and promotional materials.
Visibility: Hold the demonstration where there is lots of traffic (cars or pedestrians).
References:
igc.orgfor connecting to various issue areas and advocacy tips.
usasnet.orgfor ideas on demonstrating on campuses.

zeitgeist.net/wfca/wisefool.htm is the web site for Wise Fool Community Arts. They use art and the-
ater as vehicles for community building and social change. The Wise Fool Handbookis full of

ideas on how to make puppets and resources for street theater.
nonviolence.org/wrl is the War Resisters League web site.
interlog.com/~ksimons/198.htm for methods of nonviolent action.

Do you have other
web links that can help
your fellow activists?
Email them to
action@oxfamamerica.org.
Civil Disobedience

The basic definition of civil disobedi-
ence is the refusal to obey civil laws

regarded as unjust, usually by employ-
ing methods of passive resistance.

The ACLU describes civil disobedi-
ence as the vigorous public expression

of controversial views. It is a cherished
and vital part of American democracy,
protected by the First Amendment to
our Constitution. Non-violent protest—
even if unlawful—should always be
met by a non-violent response by
police. Check out the Handbook for
Nonviolence by the War Resisters
League.

12

Creative
Action In today’s busy world, how do you get people to stop and take notice? Creative action can be a

great way to get attention and help to educate others about an issue.
Tips:
• Focus your creative action on a specific target and message.
• Creative actions do not have to be theatrical; you can make a banner, billboard, or anything visual.
• Research history—the civil rights movement (Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.), non-violent actions
(Gandhi), apartheid (South Africa)—to learn more about direct action techniques already
taken, including challenges and successes.
Here are some examples:
100 Chairs
To demonstrate the growing wealth divide in the U.S., line up 100 chairs in a high-traffic place on
campus. Ten people spread out over 70 chairs (lying down, stretching out) while 90 people have to
fit on the remaining 30 chairs. This shows that 10 percent have 70 percent of the wealth, while all
the rest (90 percent) have only 30 percent of the wealth. You can modify this using 10 chairs and
10 people or use this concept to demonstrate other statistics. Source: United for a Fair Economy

Source: United for a Fair Economy
Human Bar Graph
One hundred students line up to represent the president’s salary, while one person represents a
janitor’s salary. A sign or spokesperson explains what is represented.
Source: United for a Fair Economy: The Campus Living Wage Campaign
Interactive Theatre
Create a short (5 minute) skit on some issue (for example, hunger, homelessness, racism, sexism).
Make the skit controversial. Go through the whole skit once for your audience. Then repeat the skit,
allowing the people in the audience to say “stop” at any point. The person stopping the skit then
replaces a character they choose and changes the play. Hold a discussion at the end.
Guerrilla Theatre
Create a dramatization that highlights your issue. For example, when Georgetown University
students were protesting sweatshop labor in the production of campus wear, they staged a fashion
show in a high-traffic area of campus. Students donned clothes with the university logo, and as

13

Do you have other
web links that can help
your fellow activists?
Email them to
action@oxfamamerica.org.

they strutted down the walkway, the emcee talked about the sub-standard wages paid to workers
who assembled the clothes. Guerrilla Theatre was used in the 1980s to dramatize death squad
abductions in Central America. Students would stage an “abduction” in the cafeteria; this creative
action engaged many students to join in Central American solidarity work.
Invisible Theatre
Create a situation that will draw on-lookers into a discussion about an important issue. Example:
Two people go into a clothing store where sweatshop labor is being used to manufacture the
clothes. The cell phone of one person rings. “Hello. Yeah, I’m here shopping at the (Name of

Store). What? You’re kidding! They use sweatshop labor to produce their clothes? Hey (to other per-
son, in a loud voice so that others can hear), did you know that (Name of Store) uses sweatshop

labor to make their clothes?” Draw the other shoppers and staff people into a discussion on living
wages as a human right (see Global Exchange, global exchange.org, for current campaigns on
living wages and other issues).
Demonstrating Inadequate Shelter
Build shantytown housing on campus to demonstrate how people not earning a decent wage are
forced to live in many countries. Sleep out in your quad to demonstrate homelessness in the U.S.
References:
ruckus.orgfor on-line training manuals (media, scouting, climbing).
directactionnetwork.orgfor information on direct actions like World Trade Organization and
International Monetary Fund protests.
ufenet.orgfor information on campus living wage campaign.
globalexchange.orgfor updates on boycotts and demonstrations.
coopamerica.orgfor listings of ethical companies and boycotts
youthpower.net for ideas on actions to take charge of your school, life and world.

14

Cyber
Activism

Rallying a Large Group of People for an Event (Virtual Organizing)
As was shown by the November 1999 Seattle WTO, various 2000 IMF/World Bank protests, anti-war
rallies, and the more recent Free Trade Area of the Americas demonstration in Miami in 2003, the
Internet can be an extremely powerful organizing tool.
Tips:
• Create a web page to go with your event. Make your emails short and direct people to a hyperlink
to the web for more details. Make sure your page is always up to date.
• Find a service provider that will allow people to easily subscribe to your listserv (try listbot.com
or egroups.com)
Listservs/Electronic Mailing List
This is a single email address that actually contains your “list” of email addresses. Listservs are a

way to discuss issues, organize, and share ideas and resources with a group of people. You can cre-
ate your own (for your particular event/cause) and join existing ones to keep up on the issues.

Make sure to actively collect email addresses at all your events, and use your listserv to keep activists
informed and connected. If you want your listserv to be one that focuses on action, information is

not enough; you need to have clear actions with specific targets, measureable goals, and clear time-
line. Here are two listservs to check out:

• SURGE (Students United for a Responsible Global Environment) is for young activists who see
the connections between all of our social, environmental, and economic justice campaigns and
efforts. Subscribe at dmarkato@email.unc.edu.
• Moveon.org has been very successful in eAdvocacy. Their student arm is clickbackamerica.org.
Find out more by looking at these cyber-activist web sites with resources for virtual organizing

Do you have other
web links that can help
your fellow activists?
Email them to
action@oxfamamerica.org.

• netaction.org/training/
• afj.org(Alliance for Justice:
E-advocacy for Nonprofits)
• organizenow.net
• ruckus.org

• cco.org
• intranets.com for information about
creating “virtual offices”
• risingsun.org/tech.html for advice on
creating a virtual community, doing it
at no cost, and much more

Lobbying your Representative On-line:
• Even though most representatives have email addresses and even web pages, legislators usually
respond better to the traditional lobbying tactics of visits, letters, phone calls, faxes, and postcards.
It is best to experiment with a variety of tactics to see which works with your representative(s).
• When you send an email to your representative, always include your mailing address in your
email. Many emails will only be taken seriously if you include your address, because that is the
only way a legislator knows you are in his or her district.
• Take a look at the Letter Writingtips. An effective email letter should follow the same guidelines.
• Use these web sites for information on how to contact your federal, state, and local representatives:
U.S. Senate: senate.gov
U.S House of Representatives: house.gov
Library of Congress: thomas.loc.gov
vote-smart.orgis a non-partisan organization that tracks voting records, campaign finance
information, issue positions, performance evaluations, and contact information.
voter.com gives you voting records of candidates and current political information/research.
progressivesecretary.org helps you to email letters to Congress, the President, and other officials
on peace, ecology, civil rights and other issues.

Creating connections among the
local activists in your city/town can be
an important way to sustain you in
your work. Check out idealist.org to
search for activists near you. Get
together and support each other in
your work. This can be a great social
network as well!

15

Finance
Your
Activist
Projects

Money—we all need it for the activities we want to organize. Often activists are called

the “out of pocket” sector because we use our own money to fund our projects. Howev-
er there are other ways to be an activist while not going broke!

• Check with activist organizations in your community and national and international nonprofits
and businesses. Often they have funds to support a specific issue. They can at least send you free
educational materials to distribute at your event.
• Look up foundations on the web—there are many that support young people and activists. For
example, check out foundationcenter.organd the Rosenburg Fund for Children, rfc.org.
• A new resource for grants is on grantsnetwork.com. This web site links grant seekers and grant
providers in a dynamic on-line environment.
• The Self-Education Foundation intends to strategically fund inspired, community-based efforts,
organizations, and individuals who support information sharing, self-advocacy, networking,
visionary thinking, and being adaptable and prepared for the changes of the future. Visit them
at selfeducation.org.
• Try to get funds from your campus student activities, student government, and political science
or other departments. Make a pitch to the committee that plans speakers and alumni events.
• Hold a fund raiser. Make it fun. Have a theme party, cook-out, house party, rave, talent show, or
a car wash. Check out alternativebreaks.com for other great ideas.
• Once you complete your project, you can apply for the Youth In Action Award for $1,000. They
recognize young people for making a difference in their community. Visit them at youthlink.org.

16

Publicity Publicity is a key element in the success of any campaign. Build a movement by educating
people about your issue and then mobilizing them to join your events. Be consistent,
frequent, and creative with your marketing tactics.
Create a core concept that can be expressed in seven words and put it on everythingyou
publish. For example, a group of young people working on body image and eating disorders
came up with “mobilizing young people to eliminate eating disorders.”
• Make up baseball cards with the “villains” or “heroes” of the movement and put statistics,
facts, and interesting information about the people on the cards.
• Write personal letters to people inviting them to participate. Tell them the specific skills they
possess and how they can be used in the project.
• Use chalk on sidewalks, streets, and chalkboards to advertise an event or message.
• Run a classified advertisement with the heading, “Looking for Activists.”
• Create a controversial billboard ad.
• Post your flyers on community billboards, corporate bulletin boards, or nonprofit bulletin boards.
• Ask professors and teachers if you can speak for 2 minutes before or after a class.
• Get a magazine to run an ad for you—this requires relationship building.
• Ask the campus and community radio and TV stations to run a PSA.
• Run your campaign in waves—the first week you put up posters with one line or symbol.
The next week you add on to the line or symbol. The next week you add on to the previous
week. By the fourth week the flyer should convey a complete message.
• Create a symbol that represents your movement. Make stickers and post them everywhere.
• Ask restaurants and bars if you can post flyers.
• Make up buttons and bumper stickers.
• Produce T-shirts with your message and web site—make them funny or
controversial.
• Give away floppy disks with a label that has your message and web site.
• Use the Internet—emails, banner ads, pop-up messages.
• Hand out flyers, t-shirts, bumper stickers, or posters—all with your message
and web site—at a concert.
• Ask a store if you can use their window for a display on your issue and event.
• You know those free post card stands at restaurants and coffee shops? Get one printed for your
issue—it’s not expensive.
• For protests, get rain parkas with your message on the back.
• Get fortune cookies made with your message or facts about your issue inside.
• When you are making t-shirts, stickers, business cards, or any promotional material, consider
having it union made to ensure the articles are not made using sweat-shop labor. Check out
uniteunion.org (click on “buy union”) for a resource in your community.

Frequency, Consistency, and Creativity!
F

lyers are expected and necessary tools of publicity. They can be used creatively, consistently, and frequently. In prepa-
ration for the Oxfam Hunger Banquet, our campus hung colorful flyers with simple, catchy phrases that conveyed

our most immediate message in order to gain the attention of lots of casual passers-by. Doors and walls along

stairwells are excellent spots because it’s hard to dismiss flyers when they’re hung at eye-level. To really explain our organiza-
tion’s purpose and our event, we also hung informative flyers in bathroom stalls, on bulletin boards, near drinking fountains,

in the library lobby, and near tables at the student union. These flyers had pictures, tables, graphs, copied articles, and a
collage of facts that were chosen to really move the reader. Flyers are a great chance to inform and convince people of the
importance of your issue with thoughtful and creative art and words.
Consistency and use of your campus’ unique resources will help ensure that you’ve reached many people. Plan ahead
and follow-through. Three weeks before the Oxfam Hunger Banquet, our organization announced the date, time, and
place of its upcoming event. We had a representative attend student government’s weekly meetings to publicize. We also
advertised through the Residence Life Office, which often requires their student RAs and hall counselors to decorate bulletin
boards or plan educational and service hall programs. Asking these students, and other organizations like fraternities,
sororities, and health- and gender-related student groups to post information or promote our event really helped us increase
participation. Also co-sponsoring events and pooling funds with other student organizations to bring a high profile guest
speaker to our campus have resulted in successful events and memorable experiences.
Effective publicity usually means attracting the optimal number of participants. To do this, creative advertising
that draws a diverse and large crowd is recommended. To gain attention for an upcoming international festival on campus,
the hosting organization obtained school permission to borrow golf carts and played music as they safely drove around
campus passing out flyers between scheduled class-times. This creative approach grabbed the attention of many. Have fun
planning and get inspired as you advertise your event, and others will undoubtedly catch your fever!
Carrie Porath
Davidson College