Edith Sandler* 
Archival Activism and Social Justice: Spotlight on Americana 2016: A Report 
DOI 10.1515/pdtc-2016-0005 
Abstract: In March of 2016, the Student Archivists at Mary- land (SAM) brought together archives professionals as part of Americana, their annual symposium at the University of Maryland. Americana 2016 “Archival Activism and Social Justice” focused on the intersection of archives and social justice, a topic of increasing importance and debate both in the archival field and in current events. Three speakers related their experiences documenting the experiences of displaced communities and social justice movements. Katharina Hering, Project Archivist for the National Equal Justice Library at the Georgetown Law Library related her work documenting the history of legal aid, indigene defense and the history of poverty. Diane Travis, a doc- toral student at the iSchool explained her project at the University of Maryland’s Digital Curation and Innovation Center reuniting the records of Japanese Americans who were interred at the Tule Lake Segregation Center during World War II. The final speaker, Denise D. Meringolo, is Director of Public History at the University of Maryland, Baltimore County and the creator of the Preserve the Balti- more Uprising Project. 
Keywords: Report, Social Justice, Activism 
“Decisions you make today affect what it is possible to know tomorrow.” The introductory remark of Brian Butler, Acting Dean of the School of Information Studies at the University of Maryland, aptly framed the subject of Amer- icana 2016, “Archival Activism and Social Justice.” Amer- icana 2016, an annual symposium hosted by the Student Archivists at Maryland (SAM), brings archives profession- als to the University of Maryland each year to speak to UMD iSchool students, alumni, faculty, area professionals, and the general public about their experiences in the field. This year Americana focused on the intersection of archives and social justice, a topic of increasing importance and debate in the archival field and in current events. 
*Corresponding author: Edith Sandler, University of Maryland, College Park – College of Information Studies, Room 4105, Hornbake Building South 4130 Campus Drive University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland 20740, United States, 
e-mail: evanwinkle00@gmail.com 
The symposium focused on the documentation of social justice movements and on the role archivists must play in them. Brian Butler, Acting Dean of the University of Maryland School of Information Studies, opened the event by asking an important question: How do we combine divergent perspectives and build archives that work for everyone? Social justice “is a hard problem” Butler con- cluded, “but it is an important problem—one archivists will get wrong, but it is incredibly important that we get better at it as we try. Transparency, creativity, and social justice, these are fundamentally hard problems which I can say with complete confidence we will get wrong ... but [we must seek solutions].” 
Butler’s closing injunction was an appropriate intro- duction for the announcement of the establishment of the Bruce Ambacher Archives and Digital Curation Fellow- ship. Michael Kurtz, associate director for the new Digital Curation and Innovation Center (DCIC) at the University of Maryland, outlined the ongoing efforts of the iSchool to encourage student research in the field of Digital Cura- tion that have made possible this new opportunity for its graduate students. In addition to the recent creation of the DCIC, the iSchool has recently created a new special- ization in Archives and Digital Curation, and the goal of the new fellowship will be to strengthen opportunities in archives and digital curation so that iSchool students in this specialization will graduate with the best opportuni- ties possible ahead of them. 
Kurtz turned the podium over to his longtime friend and colleague, Bruce Ambacher himself. Ambacher began his career at the National Archives in 1976 as a self- described “accidental archivist.” He was an unemployed Ph. D. in history, and his experience applying statistical analysis to his study of history made him a perfect fit for a new division in the National Archives called “Machine Readable Archives.” 
In the years since then, Ambacher has served the archival community not only through his extensive involve- ment in professional organizations like The Mid-Atlantic Regional Archives Conference (MARAC) and the Society of American Archivists (SAA), but also through his dedication to outreach to non-archival institutions like the Smithso- nian Institution, the Wolf Trap National Park for the Per- forming Arts, and the Federal Geographic Data Committee. 
Brought to you by | Université Paris Ouest Nanterre La Défense Authenticated Download Date | 3/13/17 8:25 AM 
PDT&C 2016; 45(2): 87–90 
   
88  E. Sandler, Archival Activism and Social Justice 

“Education,” he says, “is another way to give back to the archival community.” When Ambacher retired from the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA) in 2007, it was only three days before he took up a new position at the University of Maryland’s iSchool, where he taught the first Electronic Records course. Here, he said, “I saw the transcript of every student graduating with a degree in archives. But,” he continued, “it didn’t mean any- thing.” This realization spurred a movement to revamp the archives curriculum at the iSchool by gathering feedback from students, faculty, and employers. “What pleases me the most,” Ambacher concludes, “is that this fellowship will enable a student to pursue a career in digital curation and ensure that the electronic records that need to be pre- served are there in the future.” 
Each year, SAM awards the Distinguished Alumni Award to an alumnus / a who is committed to fostering and exemplifying the archival profession. This year’s awardee, David McCartney, entered the archives con- centration in 1995 and has since played a strong role in the profession. McCartney was there at the founding of the group, and would later become secretary and then president before graduating in 1998. In 2001, he became University Archivist at the University of Iowa, where he has focused on collecting underrepresented and diverse student groups such as people with disabilities, LGBTQ, African-Americans, and Latinos. He has also worked closely with SAA and the Midwest Archives Conference, and he volunteers at several historical societies and non-profits. Echoing Brian Butler, McCartney observes, “When we document the foibles as well as the successes of human activity, we ultimately are at the mercy of the historical record that survives.” 
The highlight of Americana was its three main speak- ers, who examined how archives and social justice inter- sect and the role archives can play in bringing about social justice in an impactful and meaningful way. 
The evening’s first speaker, Katharina Hering, is the project archivist for the National Equal Justice Library at the Georgetown Law Library. Her speech “Archives and Digital Divides” was rooted in her work documenting the history of legal aid, indigent defense, and the history of poverty. She focused on digital inequality and urged archivists to think about digital equality when creat- ing and providing access to digital content. Hering cited archival theorists like Randall Jimerson who have empha- sized the power of the archive to promote social justice and empower marginalized communities. It is not enough, Hering asserts, to simply create digital content for diverse groups; we must ensure that there is equitable access to— and use of—that content. 
Hering defines “social justice” broadly as “promot- ing a just society by challenging injustice and promoting diversity.” Archives and documentation have always played roles in social movements. Digital archives, Hering asserted, are sometimes presented as a tool for empow- erment to open up archival materials to marginalized communities and to democratize access. Some of these archives are physical, some are purely digital, and some are both. Yet, as these archives proliferate, and as we reflect on their role in promoting social justice, we must consider the digital divide. 
Initially, the debate over the digital divide focused on the gap between those who have access to digital tech- nology and those who do not. Often, there is an under- lying technological determinism, but the divide is more complex than that. The debate, however, has shifted to focus on the many dimensions of social, economic, and cultural inequalities in the New Media Age. We have to look at people’s varying levels of technological sophis- tication in the creation of archival materials, along with our ability to access materials, and preservation. Hering believes that digital archives must democratize access to materials while promoting “peace, equality, and justice, which our present society denies.” 
To demonstrate this, Hering referenced the South Asian American Digital Archive,1 a non-profit organiza- tion that is “working to create a more inclusive society by giving voice to South Asian Americans through document- ing, preserving, and sharing stories that represent their unique and diverse experiences.” Hering explained this in her talk and it was the subject of the entire symposium: archives must be more inclusive than they are at present and give underrepresented groups a voice. Even if all in our society are not equal, archives can strive to be. 
The second speaker was Diane Travis, a doctoral student at the iSchool and its research coordinator and events manager. Travis discussed her experience working on a project at the newly created Digital Curation Innova- tion Center (DCIC), first as a Master’s student and then as a Doctoral student and project leader. The Tule Lake project is part of the DCIC’s goal to support projects involved in justice, human rights, and cultural heritage. Travis’ work on this project uses computational archival science to give a voice to Japanese Americans who were interred at the Tule Lake Segregation Center during World War II. The goal of the project is to look at the “big picture” that will enable archivists and researchers to see broad patterns and ask new questions about displaced people. 
1 South Asian American Digital Archive. Accessed April 10, 2016, https://www.saada.org/. 

Brought to you by | Université Paris Ouest Nanterre La Défense Authenticated Download Date | 3/13/17 8:25 AM 
E. Sandler, Archival Activism and Social Justice  89 

Her work unites records from and about Tule Lake to provide access to these records, and to create context for discussion and the preservation of memory. After the attack on Pearl Harbor in 1941, Franklin D. Roosevelt signed Executive Order 9066 calling for all citizens and non-citizens of Japanese descent to be placed in what would later become internment camps. Over 120,000 people lost property, businesses, and anything else they could not carry and were herded into camps away from their homes. They were under constant surveillance, sur- rounded by fences and under the constant watch of armed guards. The Japanese American community has begun to talk about their families’ experiences only recently, relying on the records that remain, hoping that nothing like this happens again. Archivists, Travis believes, can guide their narrative and promote equitable access to these records. 
This is especially important given the context of the records. Like other displaced or disenfranchised groups, the records of their history are often the product of the party in power. Tule Lake documentation is no exception. Out of the ten internment camps, Tule Lake was special because it contained a super-max prison where inmates had to answer a loyalty questionnaire. If you answered incorrectly, you would be sent to the prison and your family would not be notified. Though there are records that the prison existed, there are no records of who was in there—only hints. The Tule Lake Project involves working with records recently discovered at the National Archives and Records Administration. These consist of cards con- taining metadata about alleged incidents in the camp. They give a date, names, type of incident (riot, burglary), and a description or place. Because we don’t know who wrote these cards and recorded these incidents, the valid- ity of these records must be questioned. However, these cards give an insight into the community and could answer important questions. 
The goal of the project was to digitize the records quickly and to unite them with records from different sources such as the military War Relocation Authority. The project also plans to include diverse formats that make up the collective history of the camp, including photographs, oral histories, maps, and the cards. These records are then brought together on a virtual map, which is based on an underlying graph database. This map enables researchers to search the database or select areas of the map to find relevant records. The pilot program was successful in recreating relationships between documents that allow researchers to question authority, draw conclusions, and depict an important historical moment. 
The final speaker was Denise D. Meringolo, Director of Public History at the University of Maryland, Baltimore 
County, and the creator of the “Preserve the Baltimore Uprising Project.” Meringolo, a public historian, accidental academic, and museum professional, began her talk with a bold claim: collections are not innocent. “There is no such thing as a collection that does not have its own history.” She describes herself as “activish.” Her work takes her inside museumsandcommunitypreservationorganizationstoget them to think creatively about the work they could be doing in the community, and she believes that studying public history can be a radical part of public activism. 
The “Preserve the Baltimore Uprising Project” was born in Spring 2015, when Meringolo was teaching a grad- uate introductory course in public history, which involves a community-based project on which students work on content for a Curatescape app that explores Baltimore heritage. Class plans were derailed that semester because in April, Freddy Gray was killed in Baltimore. Students wanted to understand the role of public history in this sit- uation, so Meringolo and her students spent a class period thinking about what to do. They did not want to be merely “information givers”; they wanted to create space for the community to discuss what was happening around them. 
Meringolo knew how to use Omeka through a prior digital history training session, and was convinced that it could allow people to contribute directly to a public archive. Over the course of a weekend, she built www.baltimore- uprising2015.org.2 Anyone could contribute, and there was no collections policy. Almost everyone who had a phone was taking pictures and video of the activity surrounding Freddy Gray’s death. These records, Meringolo told us, were crucial to shaping the image of what was happening in Bal- timore. National news organizations were using terms like “riot” to describe Baltimore’s reaction, but watching videos made people like Meringolo realize that what was happen- ing was not always what the media made it seem. “I saw students released from school, buses not allowed to come to the area, police already there ... [and I] saw confused stu- dents. There were several things happening,” she reported. “There were actual protests and property damage, and media stories being spun that fit everyone’s image of what Baltimore is. We wanted to influence that.” 
Simultaneously, the Maryland Historical Society put out a call for digital representations of the protests. However, because the Historical Society did not have digital collections at the time, these records were not pub- licly accessible. A former student now working in their archives contacted Meringolo and proposed a collabora- tion. The Maryland Historical Society is now the keeper 
2 “Preserve the Baltimore Uprising 2015 Archive Project.” Accessed April 10, 2016, http://www.baltimoreuprising2015.org/. 
Brought to you by | Université Paris Ouest Nanterre La Défense Authenticated Download Date | 3/13/17 8:25 AM 
 
90  E. Sandler, Archival Activism and Social Justice 

of the Omeka site, which ensures they will keep these records permanently. Yet placing this responsibility on an institution that the people of Baltimore do not always identify with or claim as theirs presents a challenge when it comes to building community trust. 
Meringolo and the Maryland Historical Society have been building that trust through the work of an advisory board composed largely of academics who teach public history or community activism and who already have rela- tionships with schools, activist organizations, and other groups that can use the site as a community-outreach and education tool. In the future, Meringolo says, they would like the project to evolve so that the Baltimore community can contribute to and interpret the objects they contrib- ute. Currently there are over 1900 items on the site, mostly photos and mostly by individuals rather than activist orga- nizations. Many people are posting to sites like Flickr and don’t understand why they should also post to the site. One of the other goals of the advisory group is to educate the community about protecting these objects for the long-term. 
Overall, Americana 2016 brought together various voices to show archivists how they can attract groups 
of people who are not normally represented in archives. Also, these speakers emphasized the value of including community groups when they create and promote the archives. It is always valuable to bring together a variety of perspectives. It is even better to let the voices in the archive lead the way and shape the story. 
References 
“Preserve the Baltimore Uprising 2015 Archive Project.” Accessed April 20, 2016, http://www.baltimoreuprising2015.org/. 
South Asian American Digital Archive. Accessed April 10, 2016, https://www.saada.org/. 
