JILL STAUFFER

E T H I C A L

L O N E L I N E S S

the injustice of not being heard

E t h i c a l

L o n e l i n e s s

published with a grant from

figure foundation
comes an adjournment of sorrow

E t h i c a l

L o n e l i n e s s

the injustice of not being heard

Jill Stauffer

Columbia University Press

New York

Columbia University Press
Publishers Since 1893
New York Chichester, West Sussex
cup.columbia.edu
“Notes Toward a Supreme Fiction” from The Collected Poems of Wallace Stevens by
Wallace Stevens © 1954 by Wallace Stevens and copyright renewed 1982 by Holly
Stevens. Used by permission of Alfred A. Knopf, an imprint of the Knopf Doubleday
Publishing Group, a division of Random House LLC. All rights reserved.

Copyright © 2015 Columbia University Press
All rights reserved
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Stauffer, Jill, 1966–
Ethical loneliness : the injustice of not being heard / Jill Stauffer.
pages cm
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-231-17150-2 (cloth : alk. paper) — ISBN 978-0-231-53873-2 (e-book)
1. Loneliness—Philosophy. 2. Loneliness—Moral and ethical aspects.
3. Persecution. 4. Oppression (Psychology) I. Title.
B105.L65S73 2015
172'.1—dc23
2015001677

Columbia University Press books are printed on permanent and durable acid-free paper.
This book is printed on paper with recycled content.
Printed in the United States of America
c 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
COVER IMAGE: KÄTHE KOLLWITZ, THE WIDOW I FROM WAR © ARS
COVER DESIGN: CHANG jaE LEE
References to websites (URLs) were accurate at the time of writing. Neither the
author nor Columbia University Press is responsible for URLs that may have expired
or changed since the manuscript was prepared.

The tortured person never ceases to be amazed that all those things one may,
according to inclination, call his soul, or his mind, or his consciousness, or
his identity, are destroyed when there is that cracking and splintering in the
shoulder joints.
—Jean Améry

The word I means here I am, answering for everything and for everyone.
—Emmanuel Levinas

But the difficultest rigor is forthwith,
On the image of what we see, to catch from that
Irrational moment its unreasoning,
As when the sun comes rising, when the sea
Clears deeply, when the moon hangs on the wall
Of heaven-haven. These are not things transformed.
Yet we are shaken by them as if they were.
We reason about them with a later reason.
...
We reason of these things with later reason.
And we make of what we see, what we see clearly
And have seen, a place dependent on ourselves.
—Wallace Stevens

Contents

Acknowledgments ix
List of Abbreviations xiii

Introduction 1
1. Ethical Loneliness 9
2. Repair 34
3. Hearing 69
4. Revision 112
5. Desert 142
Epilogue 171
Notes 173
Index 209

Acknowledgments

In Beyond Good and Evil, Nietzsche wrote, “A thought comes when ‘it’
wishes, and not when ‘I’ wish, so that it is a falsification of the facts of the
case to say that the subject ‘I’ is the condition of the predicate ‘think.’ ” I
think about that a lot. It means, among other things, that the ideas of this
book owe much to many interlocutors—a large number of persons, the
conditions in which I live, even the passing of time. Nietzsche’s reminder
is also reflected in the themes of the book, from Jean Améry learning in
the hardest way imaginable that the life of the mind is not possible absent human community, to how, in the writing of the book, the ideas took
their most interesting turns when I pushed myself to translate the argument for widely different audiences, to how none of this would have been
possible absent the gift (and luxury) of time for writing.
It began when Oona Eisenstadt invited me to present a paper at a colloquium on contemporary Jewish philosophy at Pomona College in December 2010. I thought to myself, “I am not qualified for this.” Oona insisted, and so I revised my thought and said to myself, “I suppose it is time

x Acknowledgments

for me to figure out how to put Jean Améry in conversation with Levinas.”
That paper was my first draft of the concept of ethical loneliness.
A second push came from Peter Rush at the Law School at the University of Melbourne in Australia, who asked me to give a plenary address at
a July 2011 conference called “Affective States of International Criminal
Justice.” Looking at loneliness and legal response to violence through the
lens of affect and its transfer helped me refine my argument about the self’s
intersubjective formation. The participants in the conference, a response to
my paper by Shaun McVeigh, and the faculty and graduate students at
Melbourne engaged with the work in progress in deeply helpful ways.
Then I was invited, in October 2011, to speak at a conference honoring the work of Linda Ross Meyer, where engaging with the serious challenge her work on mercy poses to the gut sense I was developing that resentment could also be restorative led me to begin to develop the ideas
about hearing that are so central to this book’s argument.
I owe singular thanks to James Martel, Claire Katz, and Gustavus
Stadler, all of whom read the full manuscript and offered helpful support
and critique—each showed me in different ways both what I knew I was
doing with the book and what I didn’t. Each moved me with the intelligence and generosity of their comments, and opened windows for me into
my own thinking.
I am also indebted to two anonymous reviewers for Columbia University Press, whose vital comments advanced my thinking about some aspects of the project, and to Wendy Lochner and Christine Dunbar, for
supporting this book and shepherding it through the publishing process.
Donovan Schaefer, Raji Mohan, Tina Zwarg, Lisa McCormick, and Gus
Stadler—all members of a faculty seminar on affect theory at the Hurford Center for the Arts and Humanities at Haverford College—read early
versions of the chapters on ethical loneliness and revision, and their comments helped me think through the project during a key stage in my writing of it. Finally, most of the book came into being during a sabbatical
leave provided by Haverford College. I used to think I could make writing happen no matter what constraints the outside world threw at me.
Having a year to sink deeply into a demanding project taught me that
some forms of thinking and writing need that buffer of space and time
around them. To recast Nietzsche’s counsel: thought doesn’t come when
I’m ready for it, it comes when it is ready—but that means one needs to
provide a space where it might arrive.

Acknowledgments

xi

During the years I worked on this book, I was invited to present work
from it at Bard College’s Human Rights Project lecture series, Yale Law
School’s Human Rights Workshop, a conference at McGill University on
“The Art and Politics of Irony,” Johns Hopkins University’s WGS workshop on “Law and Loss,” a colloquium on “Law’s Counter-Archive” at
the Birkbeck School of Law at the University of London, Rowan University’s “Theorizing Rowan” series, and as a plenary address at the 2014
meeting of the North American Levinas Society. Every audience I encountered pushed the ideas along in productive and illuminating ways.
I also presented work in progress at meetings of the Association for
the Study of Law, Culture and the Humanities, an interdisciplinary group
that has been an important intellectual home for me; the Levinas Research
Seminar, another rigorous and generative scholarly community; the
Critical Legal Studies conferences in Stockholm, Sweden, and Belfast,
Northern Ireland—so full of the best kinds of challenge to settled
thought; the Society for Phenomenology and Existential Philosophy, a
philosophical home; and the American Political Science Association,
where I am always reminded of how far work in political theory can extend. Every meeting I attended illuminated for me how important it is for
working scholars to talk to one another about matters large and small.
Further thanks go to Katie Ulrich, a student of mine at Haverford College, who engaged with this work very smartly in a senior seminar and
then agreed to take on the thankless (but thankfully paid) task of hunting
down, regularizing, and formatting the citations for the manuscript. She
did a better job than I would have done and saved me an immense amount
of time and stress in doing so.
Other friends and colleagues whose conversation and critique helped
make this book what it is include Sara Kendall, Jennifer Culbert, Stewart
Motha, Martin Kavka, Alison Young, Roger Berkowitz, Mark Antaki, Andrew Friedman, Sam Moyn, Linda Ross Meyer, John Drabinski, Diane
Perpich, Joshua Ramey, Dave Eggers, Gayle Salamon, Anne Murphy, P. J.
Brendese, Deborah Achtenberg, and Juliet Rogers, and the teachers and
mentors who challenged and supported me as I made my way to this point:
Marianne Constable, Judith Butler, Peter Fitzpatrick, Philippe Nonet, and
David Cohen.
Early versions of this work appeared in print as “Speaking Truth to
Reconciliation: Political Transition, Recovery, and the Work of Time,” Humanity 4, no. 1 (2013): 27–48, and “A Hearing: Forgiveness, Resentment,

xii Acknowledgments

and Recovery in Law,” Quinnipiac Law Review 30, no. 3 (2012): 517–26.
Ideas from those two articles appear throughout this book, and I’ve
added a note corresponding to the first sentence of sections that rely heavily on earlier material to indicate my debt to those publications. A couple
of themes from another article of mine, “How Much Does That Weigh?
Levinas and the Possibility of Human Rights,” originally published in the
Turkish journal MonoKL 8–9 (2010): 661–74, also appear in the book
(and also with a corresponding note where they appear).
It isn’t just intellectual conditions—research money, library support,
engaged students, generous colleagues, all of which I was lucky to have—
that make a book possible but also the wider world that forms a backdrop to the life of the mind. And so I also owe immense thanks to the
people I’ve long relied on most—those who actively contribute to building a shared world worth living in. My parents—Randy Stauffer (much
missed) and Cheryle Stauffer—have always believed in me. The passing
of time has shown me how much that matters. It has been a kind of
strength, a well-built world I could fall back on, one that in no small measure made me who I am. My extended kin include my best-ever sister
Natalie Kidder, Anne Stauffer, Evany Thomas, Liz Dunn, Heidi Pollock,
Caroleen Beatty, Sunny Haire, Marilyn Fontenrose, Marco Baroz, Scott
Kidder, and Ramsay Kidder. And then there is Gustavus Stadler, the one
who arrived when I least expected, taught me how to rely on someone,
and stayed.

Abbreviations

ANC
African National Congress
CONADEP National Commission on the Disappearance of Persons
(Argentina)
DRC
Democratic Republic of the Congo
EEEC
Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia
ICC
International Criminal Court
ICTR
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
ICTY
International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia
LRA
Lord’s Resistance Army
MK
Umkhonto we Sizwe (armed wing of the ANC)
NAGPRA Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act
SCSL
Special Court for Sierra Leone
TRC
Truth and Reconciliation Commission (South Africa)

E t h i c a l

L o n e l i n e s s

Introduction
The experience of persecution was, at the very bottom, that of an extreme
loneliness. At stake for me is the release from the abandonment that has
persisted from that time until today.
—Jean Améry, “Resentments”

Jean Améry wrote those lines in 1965, twenty years after he was freed
from the Bergen-Belsen concentration camp. He describes an abandonment that the passing of time, on its own, does not remedy. In what follows I want to distinguish that kind of loneliness from the solitude or
aloneness undergone by someone who can still rely on broad social support. Améry was subjected to an ethical loneliness. Ethical loneliness is
the isolation one feels when one, as a violated person or as one member
of a persecuted group, has been abandoned by humanity, or by those who
have power over one’s life’s possibilities. It is a condition undergone by
persons who have been unjustly treated and dehumanized by human beings and political structures, who emerge from that injustice only to find
that the surrounding world will not listen to or cannot properly hear their
testimony—their claims about what they suffered and about what is now
owed them—on their own terms. So ethical loneliness is the experience
of having been abandoned by humanity compounded by the experience of
not being heard. Such loneliness is so named because it is a form of social

2 Introduction

abandonment that can be imposed only by multiple ethical lapses on the
part of human beings residing in the surrounding world.
The main argument of the book is that this form of loneliness is widespread, that it is caused not only by dehumanization, oppression, and
abandonment but also by the failure of just-minded people to hear well—
from those who have suffered—what recovery or reconciliation after
massive violence or long-standing injustice would require. Such failures of
hearing haunt sites where the goal is political transition, reconciliation,
or forgiveness. As such, unassuaged ethical loneliness has political ramifications. But beyond that instrumental concern, failure to hear will matter to those who do not listen and those who are not heard, not only because stories without an audience do not survive but also because being
heard or ignored impacts how the past resonates in the present—it affects
human processes of revision. “Revision” refers not to the lies of revisionist history but to how human beings live their pasts in the present moment, with different events carrying varying amounts of significance at
different times. To take a mundane example: it may be devastating for a
teenager to be unpopular in high school, but for someone who has aged
well into adulthood, her independence and personal achievements have
likely rewritten that history, finding in it some of the sources of strength
she needed in order to succeed. Her vision of the past’s meaning for the
present will likely differ from that of someone who was a star athlete in
college but who hasn’t felt that much glory has been achieved since then.
A history stays with both of them, though differently. This is also a common experience of aging, where dogmatic certainties of youth may become either more nuanced or less committed over time, or where things
that didn’t seem to matter at a younger age suddenly present themselves
in an urgency that only collected years can put before us. In any of these
cases, we may think we are the outcome of the choices we have made,
but our choices will be only one part of the story of how we become the
selves we are. Social conditions; friends, families, and strangers; cultural
values; chance encounters; environmental factors—all of these and more
will play a role. We are shaped by the worlds in which we subsist. Someone who lives among others who value athletic achievement, financial
gain, or some other kind of fame higher than success at raising children
may be more likely to devalue her current life (of raising children) than
would one surrounded by people whose main aim is to be part of a thriving family. Someone who chooses a creative path that isn’t well supported

Introduction 3

by capitalist market forces may feel that she is fortunate, brave, silly, or a
failure—depending at least in part on how her choices resonate in her surroundings. Someone who has chosen to pursue an office job or the life of
the mind without marriage or children may, if surrounded mainly by thriving families, find herself feeling that her life is simply invisible where she
lives, especially if the past and present history of her social setting offers
few guides and little support for an alternative path.
These are small things, tiny heartaches. I begin with mundane examples—and return to that level on occasion throughout the book—in
order to demonstrate, and keep it firm in our minds, that this book full of
stories of violence and injustice is also describing the human condition:
our intersubjective reliance on one another. When I employ an everyday
example to clarify a concept that then gets used to explain something
much more dire, it is always to remind us that I am not describing things
that can happen only to others or to people in desperate circumstances. It
is part of the human condition that abandonments and abuses affect us
as deeply as they do, and it starts with everyday losses that are less serious but that may underscore for us—if we take the time to look—our
vulnerability, our false ideas about our autonomy, and what matters
about the autonomy we do have. It is possible for each of us to think differently about how we come to be who we are, have what we have, and,
accordingly, what we owe to the larger world. The mind-sets, views, and
affective relations of human beings living in a shared world make a difference in what each of us thinks is possible, fitting, or just. A vast revolution can occur in that tiny space. It matters what stories we tell ourselves
about these things. What is true in the preceding example about career choices is also true in cycles of violence, where even if retaliation
is thought to be a “natural” response, what that will mean in a lived context—whether it will be violent, measured, world building, or world destroying—will be influenced by the attitudes of other human beings whose
interactions make up the lived world we share for better and for worse.
Important aspects of how the past is lived in the present are beyond
the capacity of an individual to choose or control. Where the stakes are
higher, for a survivor of political oppression or anyone whose past is impacted by trauma, it will matter that current social and political conditions affect what kinds of revision are possible. Recovery may be easier for
someone with broad social support, who knows both that, though she was
once victimized, she is now safe and that her neighbors and the officials

4 Introduction

who enforce laws are committed to equal justice, than it is for someone
who has survived brutal treatment but lives in a community where her
harms haven’t been addressed, are dismissed as part of a past that
should be buried, or aren’t widely declared to be harms worthy of redress.
For those whose pasts are haunted by injustice, revision can be a lifesaving human capacity. But some conditions make positive revisions possible, while others make negative ones more likely. Institutions may influence these conditions for better and for worse, but they cannot change
them on their own.
It isn’t only our choices that make us who we are. Selves and worlds
are built by human interactions—affective, reasoned, chosen, and unchosen. Those forces are the backdrop to the worlds we build and in which
we reside. Autonomy and liberty mean something only in spaces where
they are respected. One aim of the book will be to show that this means
responsibility for justice and recovery is, rather than a narrow legal concern, the very broadest of obligations. The past cannot be changed, but it
can resound in the present moment in vastly different ways, some of them
more hospitable to human thriving than others. It is everyone’s job to
author conditions where repair is possible.
In chapter 1 I develop an account of ethical loneliness. Using Jean
Améry’s reflections on being tortured and interned in concentration camps,
Levinasian phenomenology, and evidence from various forms of testimony,
I show how isolation and loneliness are part of the human condition, but
particular uses of them actively remove some persons from that condition, dehumanizing them. The argument relies on an idea that selfhood is
intersubjective, and thus it may come into conflict with the sovereignty of
self assumed by some versions of liberal political theory, especially the tradition attached to institutional legality—which is the traditional site for
theorizing reconciliation or transition after political violence. This is a
tough line to tread, since I am concerned less with liberal political theory
as it is practiced by careful thinkers of that tradition and more with widespread deeply held assumptions (almost bodily senses of truth) about
what selves are, what responsibility is, and so on, that are inherited from
a broad kind of Western liberalism. It’s in the air and the water, you might
say, to think that an uncomplicated autonomy is a natural and therefore
nonnegotiable trait of human beings. I want to complicate that, allowing
us to see autonomy as one outcome of the relation between human beings rather than as a predetermined boundary between them. Jean Améry’s

Introduction 5

reflections on torture, abandonment, and the life of the mind set us on
that path.
I use the work of Emmanuel Levinas to develop the account of ethical
loneliness and the cooperatively authored self. The self’s liberty still
matters. But I’ll argue that we cannot properly appreciate how that liberty
is accomplished if we approach selves as if they were self-sufficient monads.
Indeed there are harms—and remedies—that are rendered utterly inscrutable if we limit ourselves to thinking that a human self can experience
meaningful autonomy separate from social conditions where many others recognize that self’s autonomy. Selves are formed intersubjectively, in
the presence of others, for better and worse and regardless of whether any
of us would have willed it to be this way. Acknowledging that brings us
closer to understanding how selves and worlds can be destroyed by human
violence, and why human beings can be wounded—not only physically—
in such deep and lasting ways. Being abandoned by those who have the
power to help produces a loneliness more profound than simple isolation. That is why practices of political transition, reconciliation, or recovery should always aim to do more than rebuild the formal equality or
political autonomy of persons. The “form” of equality offered in the context of individualist institutions cannot, on its own, remedy a harm made
possible only by widespread neglect of human responsiveness.
Viewing recovery through the lens of ethical loneliness helps to balance
a tendency to settle too quickly into ideas about autonomy, self-sufficiency,
or sovereignty, formal equality, liberty as the capacity to choose one’s
commitments, all enshrined in what gets called the rule of law. Those assumptions find their way into the design of international institutions like
criminal tribunals, international courts, and truth commissions. And they
haunt the practices of political reconciliation and transitional justice.
The focus on ethical loneliness gives me a way to change the subject.
Instead of talking about procedure, legality, and blame, I focus on how
abandonment and loss are achieved and how they may be alleviated or
compensated. In doing so I emphasize harms undergone more than wrongs
inflicted. To set the context for the stakes of that shift, chapter 2 follows
a tangent to the main argument, because its course is currently central to
questions of reconciliation and recovery. In chapter 2, I discuss the retributive and reparative goals of postconflict trials and truth commissions.
Courts focus on individual criminal responsibility—the culpability of the
autonomous self—even for crimes that are possible only against a backdrop

6 Introduction

of widespread indifference and abuse. Truth commissions uncover the
broader details of an unjust past but often get caught between the conflicting goals of nation building and individual recovery. Chapter 2 does justice
to how important trials and truth commissions can be as local and international responses to grave harm but also shows the limits to thinking
about the harms of dehumanization and abandonment only in terms of
crime, individual responsibility, or nation building. It also uncovers a lack
of substantial proof for the contention that these proceedings are cathartic
or healing for survivors. My aim is, while acknowledging everything that is
awe-inspiring about the responsive international, domestic, and hybrid institutions that have been created in the past few decades, to begin to focus
also on what we don’t know and what these institutions can’t do.
And so I situate the discussion of trials and truth commissions in a
larger conversation about repair. Whenever we settle on a course of repair, we ought first to consider what repair is, the ethics of how repair
proceeds, who gets to decide what needs to be fixed, and whether there
are things that cannot or should not be repaired. Repair, after all, is not a
neutral practice. It is an intervention preceded by decisions made about
value. It will matter whose voices get heard when those decisions are made.
Chapter 3 then turns its ear to hearing. In it I discuss how unintended
ironies surface wherever institutions designed for hearing fail to hear well,
and I show how the effects of those ironies tend to weigh most heavily on
those with the least power to endure bad outcomes. Relying on testimony
delivered in diverse settings—South Africa, Argentina, Holocaust archives,
Native American dealings with U.S. legal proceedings, American prisons,
the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia—I show
failed attempts at listening and discuss some of the reasons why even a
supportive audience might fail to hear well. The difference between communication—which always involves risk and uncertainty—and knowledge
as fact emerges as key to understanding what is at stake in listening to
the testimony of those who have been abandoned. Levinas’s work will help
here as well, showing how communication is rooted as much in our
precognitive response to others as it is in its instrumental use to convey
stable meanings. Described this way, responsibility appears not as a form of
culpability but as a duty to respond not backed by the security of set rules.
Responding well to others, especially survivors of wrongdoing, may require that we open ourselves to hearing something other than what we
expect or want to hear, even when what we hear threatens our ideas about

Introduction 7

how the world is ordered—as listening to survivor testimony might do.
Only a self capable of being jolted out of its mundane complacency is up
to the task of both hearing what repair demands and helping to invent
new responses to harms that no preexisting remedy fully comprehends.
That form of listening may also more readily come to understand why
the liberal story about culpability—that we are responsible only for acts
we author and intend—cannot fix, or even adequately address, the most
grievous harms human beings face (and create). And that will open a space
where we might ask why Western legality so often fails to listen for its
own failures. The stakes are high here, because when no one listens, stories get lost. But unaddressed harms do not disappear. They remain, and
they color the affective relations between persons and communities, haunting the official sites of transition and reconciliation.
Chapter 4 looks at revision as a human capacity. As I mentioned earlier, by “revision” I mean the different ways in which a past can be lived
in a present moment. For those struggling to rebuild selves, lives, and
worlds after extended conflict or grave harm, some revisions render the
present more livable than it otherwise would have been. Others fail to release the present moment from past harm, so that “now” seems to lack
the capacity to offer a future. The chapter explores the relationship between resentment, forgiveness, time, and recovery for beings (such as ourselves) for whom revision is possible, defining “revisionary practice” as
a way of making the past more livable in the present moment.1 Key to
chapter 4 is Jean Améry’s refusal to forgive and his principled defense of
his continued resentment against both forgiveness and the specter of Nietzschean ressentiment. His resistance helps us see the difference between
reconciliation with other persons and reconciliation with time. Reconciliation with time reflects the desire, separate from any will to renew a
relationship with an enemy, to be able to live with what the past has been.
Nietzsche might say we can learn to “will backwards” on our own, but
survivors of violence (and probably most of the rest of us) will likely need
more than our own will to accomplish that. A survivor will need broad
social support that functions as a promise that, though she was once abandoned by humanity, that will not be allowed to happen again. That is an
aspect of world building, which is a cooperative enterprise, not a solitary
endeavor. Accordingly, chapter 4 also shows why concepts of individual
criminal responsibility and bystander innocence do not actively build
worlds but rather, at best, reflect a world already built to support the

8 Introduction

liberal individual. Rebuilding destroyed selves and worlds requires more
than that, which is only one reason why autonomous subjects with comfortable “self-sufficient” lives may also need to focus revisionary practices
on their own selves before justice can be seen to be done.
Chapter 5 revisits retribution’s roots in the Latin verb tribuere to recapture the word’s wider history, arguing that calls for retribution always
reflect a sense that something has been unjustly taken and that a balance
must be put right. One must redo, offer again, something that should have
remained intact. Retribution is thus a revisionary practice. In many circumstances the punishment of perpetrators is not sufficient to accomplish
such a goal. That is why retribution needn’t appear as an antonym of repair: in some cases its best goal is tribuere: to bestow, confer, grant, allow,
or devote something deserved to one who deserves it. In this reading,
“desert” applies not only to perpetrators but also to victims and the surrounding society. As such, “reparative retribution” repays those harmed
for their harm. It offers compensation for loss. In addition to opening up
our sense of the meaning of the word, defining retribution in this way also
helps us understand why anger and resentment are not only negative affects: they express a person’s righteous indignation at being treated unjustly and so may be important positive expressions of a relationship to
the past, present, and future that is both reasoned and affective.
The chapter looks at cases from the United States, Argentina, Uganda,
and South Africa where existing categories of response do not do justice
to victims, to perpetrators, or to the larger unjust system in which those
affected find themselves and considers alternatives to existing institutions
that may be capable of addressing these harmful legacies more thoroughly.
Each of the cases discussed shows that, though it will never be possible to
hear everything—communication is fragile—what will matter in many settings is whether people who listen will, while paying attention to what is
said, also watch out for what is not being heard. It will be important for
those who listen to reflect on the limits to what they already know and
how that affects what they are able to hear. Perhaps then people and the
institutions they design will be able to listen for their own failures—and
thus begin to live up to what justice after complex conflict or long-standing
injustice demands.
The book then ends with a short meditation on how the relationship
between selves, time, and other selves impacts our ideas and practices of
justice and recovery.

1
Ethical Loneliness

Ethical loneliness is the experience of being abandoned by humanity compounded by the experience of not being heard. This chapter advances a
phenomenology of sorts, describing how we are formed as selves and how
this bears on ethical loneliness. Two thinkers who had deep experience of
abandonment—Jean Améry and Emmanuel Levinas—are integral both
to the philosophical structure of the argument and to its affective contour.

Stories
We tell ourselves stories all the time about the kinds of selves we are. We’re
good at singing, bad at cooking. We are well loved by others, or maybe
we are not. We are independent—no one’s going to tell us what to do. Or
we can’t imagine who we would be separate from a loved one. We love
cats, or dogs, or we think animals aren’t meant to be domesticated. We
are the type to nurture others, or maybe we tend to show them tough love.
We need the help of others, or we don’t. We identify with a gender, race,

10

Ethical Loneliness

social class. We succeed. We fail. We belong, or we don’t. We tell ourselves
these stories. They may or may not be true. We may believe them whether
or not they are true and whether or not they are good for us. In part these
stories form who we are, again whether or not they are true or good
for us.
Where do the stories come from? They come from our experience of
the world, of course, and from our sense of who we are. But they also
come from what other people say to us, from the values and truths produced by whatever cultures surround us, and from unspoken affective interactions between persons living alongside one another. For many of us,
a deeply embedded story of who we are names us sovereign. We are autonomous selves, capable of consenting—or refusing to consent—to the
conditions in which we live. Of course, many of us who tell ourselves that
story also know that it leaves out part of the plot, since we didn’t get to
give birth to ourselves in a world we designed.1 Instead, we landed, defenseless and in need of care, in a world already under way and as such
full of rules, values, practices, and truths that we did not choose. If we
are sovereign, it is in a dependent kind of way. Of course we know that.
In this chapter and those that follow I want to highlight moments when
we may forget to know that. “We”: a broad and large but not universal
kind of first person plural made up of people who care about justice but
whose lives have been lived mostly in a world safely taken for granted as
benign—if not for everyone, at least for “us.” I ask how well “we” know
the limits to our autonomy not in order to rehearse another argument
about free will or determinism but to draw attention to justice. Assumptions about the self’s sovereignty are deeply embedded in prevalent ideas
about justice. This is easily recognizable in the idea that we are responsible only for things we’ve done and intended, that we are blameworthy
when we act with free will against standards we’ve accepted as our own,
and that we lack culpability if we did not act freely or had no way of
knowing what the rules require. There is nothing wrong with that idea
on the face of it. But behind it lurk some problems, and I don’t mean only
the deservedly pervasively discussed ones about how social, political, and
economic conditions undermine free will. There is something about the
idea of autonomy that limits the stories we tell ourselves about who we
are. And so we don’t see very well who we are in certain circumstances.
And so we may find ourselves developing strange ideas about how to proceed. That might be fine if all it meant is that we are deluded about our

Ethical Loneliness

11

own selves. But I said I want to draw our attention to justice. I suspect
that when we limit the stories we tell ourselves about what autonomy
means for the kinds of beings we are, we miss something that matters more
than a personal delusion might. If we misunderstand what autonomy is
and what conditions its successful exercise requires, we may fail to comprehend how the selves and worlds of some human beings can be destroyed by other human beings. That might mean that we will have no
idea how to listen to those who survive such harrowing loss. And, because
we don’t hear, we fail to learn something about the limits to our own autonomy and, more important, simply don’t understand what conditions
make successful recovery or reconciliation more or less likely after worlddestroying events. Finally, we won’t see how very unjust it is to believe, in
some circumstances, that we are responsible only for what we’ve done and
intended.

Destruction
At the beginning of his essay “At the Mind’s Limits,” Jean Améry admits
that “the little word ‘I’ will have to appear here more often than I like,
namely wherever I cannot take for granted that others have shared my
personal experience.”2 How many of us have shared his experience? Raised
in Austria, half Jewish and half Catholic by birth, a secular intellectual
with a love of philosophy, he fled Austria in 1938 for France and then
Belgium, where he spent time in the Belgian Resistance. Then came arrest, torture, and years in Auschwitz, Buchenwald, and Bergen-Belsen.
Having changed his birth name, Hans Maier, to the Gallicized anagram
Améry, after liberation he remained in exile, a writer composing in German but, for many years, refusing all German and Austrian outlets. Not
many share his experience, not only because it is his own but also because
it is made up of many layers of imposed isolation. It is that isolation—his
ethical loneliness—that we need to understand in order to see what it was
he sought to overcome in the postwar years, and what that search can
tell us about the limits and possibilities of reconciliation.
At this historical moment some might not remember that there was a
time after World War II when the Holocaust was not yet named or widely
acknowledged for what it was.3 Jean Améry committed suicide in 1978,
at about the time Germany began to deal with its Nazi past in ways that
stretched beyond the legalism of the Nuremberg and Auschwitz trials and

12

Ethical Loneliness

into public consciousness by means of monuments, memorial sites, and
civic education. Ruth Kluger, another survivor of the camps, describes in
her memoir various of her experiences trying to communicate about her
past in the United States in the years after World War II. Attending Hunter
College in the 1940s, she found that in the consciousness of the Americans she encountered, “the Holocaust had no name yet, and hence it wasn’t
even an idea, only an event: among the other disasters of the Second World
War, a lot of Jews had died.”4 It was not widely known that there had
been a concerted effort to eliminate a group of people from the earth. Anton Gill shows how, between 1945 and the Eichmann trial (1961), even
in Israel there was a tremendous silence around the Holocaust, an unwillingness to hear survivors’ stories.5 That puts Améry’s struggle in a wider
context: his resistance to forgiveness was in part a way to demand a
wider recognition of the specific harms he had suffered, since no preexisting general term would capture adequately the horror of what he survived.
As Kluger puts it, “A concept without a name is like a stray dog or feral
cat. To domesticate it, you have to call it something.”6 Améry’s resistance
to the passing of time seeks a proper name for what happened to him.
What happened to Améry? I’ve already said that he was arrested, tortured, and interned in concentration camps. Readers understand what
those things are. But those who have never been beaten, tortured, or otherwise dehumanized may lack the kind of understanding that brings to
the fore the harm of these crimes. Améry himself admits that he thought
he knew what was in store for him after his arrest. He had heard about
beatings and torture and had prepared himself for the possibility that such
things might befall him: “I regarded myself . . . as an old, hardened expert on the system, its men and its methods. . . . I thought there could be
nothing new for me in this area. What would take place would then have
to be incorporated into the relevant literature, as it were. Prison, interrogation, blows, torture; in the end, most probably death.”7 That police
officers in both fascist and nonfascist states sometimes strike those they
arrest is common knowledge, and often the public doesn’t even protest,
whether because they believe that those who get arrested are “bad guys”
or they think physical abuse may be necessary to police interrogation, or
they are certain such things could never happen to them. In all those cases,
the idea of police brutality is just that—an abstraction. Améry thought
his theoretical knowledge of what was in store for him had prepared him.
But all that evaporated in the face of what he calls “the first blow”:

Ethical Loneliness

13

Simple blows, which really are entirely incommensurable with actual
torture, may almost never create a far-reaching echo among the public, but for the person who suffers them they are still experiences that
leave deep marks. . . . The first blow brings home to the prisoner
that he is helpless, and thus it already contains in the bud everything
that is to come.
(27)

Améry learned firsthand that no amount of knowledge can prepare a person for what physical abuse does. As he puts it, it turns a human being
into a body. It does that in part by demonstrating to a person that he is
powerless. That is why, though a gulf separates a punch in the face from
torture, the first blow already begins to teach torture’s lesson about power.
For Améry, the reality of the first blow, rather than emerging as an interruption of the concrete everyday, reveals everyday life to be mostly a “codified abstraction,” something that keeps us from standing “face to face
with the event and, with it, reality” (26). The blow is real; daily life is
abstract. He writes, “What one tends to call ‘normal life’ may coincide with
anticipatory imagination and trivial statement” (26); the outcomes of our
everyday actions tend to correspond with our expectations because of
how mundane details get codified by our unreflective adherence to norms.
As Jamie O’Connell points out,
most people possess a basic sense of security in the world: they go
through daily life fairly confident that they will not be subjected to
emotional or physical attack without warning, except perhaps in
places they know to be particularly dangerous. Brutal abuse by another human being can shatter this, leaving the survivor constantly
terrified of being subjected to the same torment again.8

For those who have never been left truly helpless, most of life passes without much demand that they confront the risks and responsibilities they
incur simply by existing. For that reason, Améry takes issue with Arendt’s
thesis on the “banality” of evil: “When an event places the most extreme
demands on us, one ought not speak of banality. For at this point there is
no longer any abstraction and never an imaginative power that could even
approach its reality.”9 Here Améry (like many others) misunderstands Arendt’s meaning in using the term; he would likely agree that part of what
was evil about how Nazis and many ordinary Germans treated Jewish

14

Ethical Loneliness

persons was its banality—the everyday ease with which they dehumanized people without applying moral categories. But Améry’s point is that
the inescapable reality of violence cannot be called banal by those who
suffer it. He argues that, while it may have been initially shocking to him
that Gestapo officers possessed, in addition to pistols and leather coats,
ordinary faces, his treatment by those officers destroyed in him “all abstractive imagination,” converting them back into faces of evil because of
“how evil overlays and exceeds banality” (25).
He was beaten by the police officers who arrested him. He didn’t give
up any information, at least in part because he had no information to give
up: his unit of the Resistance was organized in such a way that operatives
did not know the names or locations of other operatives. And so he was
transferred to Fort Breendonk, where he was tortured. Here is his initial
description of what happened:
In the bunker there hung from the vaulted ceiling a chain that above
ran into a roll. At its bottom end it bore a heavy, broadly curved iron
hook. I was led to the instrument. The hook gripped into the shackle
that held my hands together behind my back. Then I was raised with
the chain until I hung about a meter over the floor. In such a position, or
rather, when hanging this way, with your hands behind your back, for a
short time you can hold at half-oblique through muscular force. During these few minutes, when you are already expending your utmost
strength, when sweat has already appeared on your forehead and lips,
and you are breathing in gasps, you will not answer any questions.
Accomplices? Addresses? Meeting places? You hardly hear it. All your
life is gathered in a single, limited area of the body, the shoulder
joints, and it does not react; for it exhausts itself completely in the
expenditure of energy. But this cannot last long, even with people
who have a strong physical condition. As for me, I had to give up
rather quickly. And now there was a crackling and splintering in my
shoulders that my body has not forgotten until this hour. The balls
sprang from their sockets. My own body weight caused luxation; I
fell into a void and now hung by my dislocated arms, which had
been torn high from behind and were now twisted over my head.
Torture, from Latin torquere, to twist. What visual instruction in
etymology! At the same time, the blows from the horsewhip showered

Ethical Loneliness

15

down upon my body, and some of them sliced cleanly through the light
summer trousers that I was wearing on this twenty-third of July 1943.
(32–33)

He points out that this is not the worst torture that can befall a captive.
But he was broken, and not only because his shoulders were dislocated.
Harm, when it is imposed by another human being, leaving neither hope
of the self’s resistance or another’s assistance, may destroy a self: “You
yourself suffer on your body the counter-man that your fellow man became. If no help can be expected, this physical overwhelming by the other
then becomes an existential consummation of destruction altogether” (28).
Dehumanization is a common enough word, used to classify certain
forms of bad treatment whereby human beings are deprived of their status as human beings, and it can describe many different kinds of bad treatment, so it may be necessary to describe further this particular denial of
humanity, because understanding what dehumanizes also helps us determine what we take a human being to be. What Améry lost was his capacity to expect just treatment or help in the absence of such treatment. He
writes that when harm is inflicted “against which there can be no defense
and which no helping hand will ward off, a part of our life ends and it
can never again be revived” (29). He calls what he underwent “the border violation of my self by the other, which can be neither neutralized by
the expectation of help nor rectified through resistance” (33). He also
names it a death—a death that was then drawn out over years of abuse
and deprivation in concentration camps, where he was beaten, starved,
forced to work without adequate clothing in freezing temperatures and
to witness the deaths of his comrades. His humanity was denied consistently for years.
Améry tells us multiple times that his sovereignty was violated and that
he never recovered: “Frail in the face of violence, yelling out in pain, awaiting no help, capable of no resistance” (33). But it is important to note
that in the narrative he constructs, what is irreparable about what befell
him is made up of equal parts loss of sovereignty and despair of all help.
Human beings are always autonomous and dependent at the same time.
If dehumanization destroys in a human being the capacity to expect help
or just treatment, then part of what we take humanity to encompass is
that the expectation of help or just treatment should be rewarded. That

16

Ethical Loneliness

means that even beings who call themselves sovereign should know that
they will need the help of others if that sovereignty is to be meaningful—
sovereignty always relies on others who acknowledge its worth and thus
observe its boundaries. Dehumanization is, in part, the refusal of that response. Sovereignty is dependence.10

Dependence
Améry writes, “I don’t know if the person who is beaten by the police
loses human dignity. Yet I am certain that with the very first blow that
descends on him he loses something we will perhaps temporarily call ‘trust
in the world.’ ”11 Trust in the world consists, for Améry, in “the certainty
that by reason of written or unwritten social contracts the other person
will spare me—or, more precisely stated, that he will respect my physical,
and with it also my metaphysical, being” (28). He adds, “The expectation
of help, the certainty of help, is indeed one of the fundamental experiences
of human beings, and probably also of animals” (28).
Emmanuel Levinas points out that philosophers tend to think that truth
consists in an “exhibition of being,” the revelation of something that exists and is verifiably true. But, he continues, when philosophers stop there,
they fail to ask what shows itself in truth and who looks.12 This has something to do with the ability to make and hear cries for help. Levinas
writes, “Why does research take form as a question? How is it that the
‘what?’ . . . becomes a demand and a prayer, a special language inserting
into the ‘communication’ of the given an appeal for help, for aid addressed
to another?”13 Something exists; its existence is intelligible, truth, a given.
And yet we still have questions about it. Such questions assume an interlocutor, someone who listens and responds and, in doing so, helps to confirm both the reality of the world and standards of shared living—everything from the “tiny ethics” of social etiquette to injunctions against
murder and abuse. Questions and their assumed interlocutors thus open
up a whole world beyond curiosity and research, leading us fairly directly
to conditions necessary for human beings inhabiting a shared world. In a
discussion of how he felt his intellectual life slipping away in the camps,
Améry describes how some lines from Hölderlin’s poetry occur to him
during a march on a cold evening but no longer affect him as they once did:
“Perhaps the Hölderlin feeling, encased in psychic humus, would have
surfaced if a comrade had been present whose mood would have been

Ethical Loneliness

17

somewhat similar and to whom I could have recited the stanza. The worst
was that one did not have this comrade.”14 Améry’s point was not that
there were no other intellectuals in the camp but that for those who were
there, it was difficult to sustain a belief in the reality of the life of the
mind. Of the various poetic and philosophical sources of meaning that
had once sustained him he writes, “Where they still meant something they
appeared trivial, and where they were not trivial they no longer meant
anything” (19). Améry had lost, among other things, the experience of
intellectual inspiration that, for the person whose humanity has not been
disregarded, seems private and, more significant, independent of others.
His love of the life of the mind had gone missing not because he was kept
from his studies but because the conditions imposed on him removed
him from human community. Otherwise put, Améry is compelled to use
the “little word ‘I’ ” not because of an intellectual solitude, something he
might have defined for himself in the work of thinking, such that he was
in some way master of his own thoughts, his own inner life. What narrows his experience to an “I” is something more like a forced existential
isolation. He had been abandoned by humanity.
Améry felt his love of the life of the mind slipping away in the camps.
Levinas reveals that what feels like intellectual solitude to a free person is
already a form of community: research takes form as a question, and a
question addresses itself to others. That is an existential as much as an
ethical truth.

Existing
It is easy enough to take one’s own existence for granted. What would be
the point or even the mechanism of “taking for granted” anything if I
did not exist to do so? But there are conditions—or moods, or modes of
attunement—that, if we examine them, reveal a human being’s resistance
to existence, to the fact that one is. Fatigue, weariness, indolence, these
are positions taken with regard to existence. But the “taking” of a position, in these instances, doesn’t feel like volition, as states like indolence
and fatigue tend to arise against one’s will. In Existence and Existents
Levinas writes, “In weariness [la lassitude] existence is like the reminder
of a commitment to exist, with all the seriousness and harshness of an
unrevokable contract.”15 Self that I am, I’m stuck here in this body. Existence is a bond from which there is no release.

18

Ethical Loneliness

And yet we resist it. We look for escapes from being—and sometimes
we find them for a moment in intoxication, aesthetic contemplation, sex,
or other distractions. We find ways to release ourselves from the weight
of existence. When Levinas points out that we all long to escape “being,”
he does not mean that we want to die. Death and suicide are ways out, of
course. But for those who do live on, existing in the mode of resistance to
that existence reveals something about the kinds of beings we are.
It’s not that in every case of resistance we have chosen to resist. This
isn’t about rational or irrational choice. The refusal of existence is not a
theoretical refusal—or is not only that. Not an autonomous decision, it
is the event of refusal rather than the thought of refusal. Levinas describes
the distinction as follows:
When we take fatigue and indolence [la fatigue et la paresse] as contents [of thoughts], we do not see what is effected in them—or of what
they are an impotent nonacceptance. Their whole reality is made up
of that refusal. To take them as contents of the mind is to start by situating them in the flux of consciousness as “psychic realities,” and
then to ascribe to them, as a secondary property . . . an intention of
refusal, a refusing thought. It is to interpret the event of refusal which
they are in their very production . . . as a theoretical refusal.
(11)

When we think fatigue is the content of a thought, we give ourselves too
much agency—we think we have fatigued intentions. But that mistakes
what the event of fatigue is. An example: as most writers know, procrastination is not primarily the content of a thought but is rather the event
of resistance to a weight one wishes to shed. I don’t think to myself,
“I am going to put off doing what I should be doing, what on some level
I even want to be doing.” Rather, I find myself in the midst of a refusal,
failing to do what I aim to do. Procrastination is more mood than intention. If we think of weariness as the thought of weariness, and refusal to
act as a decision we’ve made, that may help us blame ourselves and others for inaction. Such an account aligns nicely with retributive theories of
justice and volitional theories of the subject, and both of those have important contributions to make to our ideas about selves and justice. But
it leaves us with an incomplete picture of the kind of being a human being is. After all, how often do I get to decide to be tired of something? It’s
not that a weary being is lazy or has failed to make key decisions—or at

Ethical Loneliness

19

least it is not only that—but that in moments of weariness, fatigue, and
indolence, the weight of existence asserts itself.
Levinas takes the analysis a step further and says that when the weight
of existence asserts itself, it allows us—if we take note—to look at existence rather than taking it for granted. Levinas writes, “Fatigue is not a
cancellation of one’s contract with being. The delay it involves is an inscription in existence, but what is peculiar to this inscription, its sort of
hesitation, enables us to surprise it, to catch sight of the operation of assuming which the existence that is taken up already always involves” (25).
If I pay attention to it, my lack of intention in the matter of my fatigue or
procrastination might teach me something important about what a self is
and how it is formed. When I am happy, full of energy, or simply up to
the task at hand, existence does not strike me as a problem, does not strike
me at all. It remains in the background. But I am not always happy or up
to the task at hand, and in those moments I may experience existence as
a weight—something that remains despite anything I will—but also as
something that I must take up at every moment whether I will it or not.
When I pause and consider that, I see existence: my resistance to it, the
inevitable failure of that refusal, the need to take it up again each moment, and what, together, those things mean. There is a whole lot that is
unchosen at the heart of a self’s liberty. My sovereignty depends.
I might do nothing rather than the something demanded of the present
instant: going to work, grading papers, cooking a meal, calling a friend,
getting off the couch. In other words, I might lag behind the present moment rather than taking it up. But the moment will occur anyway. It’s not
that I somehow fail to be a self if I remain on the couch. When I am in the
mode of fatigue, I may wish I didn’t have to go on in the present moment.
But life will go on—either in the mode of my taking it up or in the mode
of my refusal to do so. If I remain in the mode of (willed or unwitting)
refusal, indolence “may inhere in the act that is being realized, in which
case the performance rolls on as on an ill-paved road, jolted about by instants each of which is a beginning all over again” (13). We all know
such moments, sometimes making up whole days or weeks. We lag behind whatever present moment we are faced with, and so, rather than successfully avoiding our existence, we live it in the mode of bumbling, halfass, wishful thinking or failure. Indolence “is a being afraid to live which
is nevertheless a life” (17). Existence is mine, and each moment is a
new beginning, beckoning me to take it on. That’s freedom. But, again,

20

Ethical Loneliness

my refusal to take up an instant is destined to fail. That’s finite freedom.
No escape.
Still, the sense of a freedom more than finite seizes us regularly. Levinas writes that “our first feeling, our ineradicable illusion, is a feeling or
illusion of freedom” (44), and he suggests that this feeling comes from our
relationship to intelligibility, the way things present themselves to us in
the light of the world. What could be more obvious than my freedom to
interact or not interact with objects in my surroundings? If I want to eat
the apple sitting in a bowl in my kitchen, I’ll reach out and do so. And if
I don’t, I won’t, and so perhaps I am sovereign with regard to apples in
my kitchen. Objects leave us room to reach toward them but also to withdraw from them. An object in light “comes from an exterior already
apprehended and comes into being as though it came from us, as though
commanded by our freedom” (41)—or so the Cartesian account assumes.
“It is a way of relating to events while still being able to not be caught up
in them. To be a subject is to be a power of unending withdrawal, an
ability always to find oneself behind what happens to one” (42). Here we
find the subject who is so confident that conditions will offer her a space
of intelligibility that she does not even know that this belief requires
confidence, or belief. She merely thinks that is what the world is.
It may be possible to live a whole life without having that confidence
interrupted. One might call that the goal of liberal political theory, to provide or defend conditions where confidence in the intelligibility of the
world may thrive. Those are not bad goals! We should note, however, that
sites where such confidence remains secure are unequally portioned out
across space, time, and other ways of dividing up worlds. What Levinas
and Améry describe complicates the assumed inevitability of that security. If we pay heed, their descriptions may make it more difficult to take
an easy autonomy for granted. We may see that the sovereign feeling sometimes possessed by human beings is not an essence but a product of human
interaction. And that might open us up to recognizing a form of liberty—
or even of law—that is a responsibility rather than an abstract freedom.
If any of us has meaningful freedoms or legal protections—or if any of us
lack them—that is the outcome not only of institutions but of a range of
human relationships where responsibility is diffuse and not easily capturable in a story that focuses on consent to being governed and culpability
for individual wrongdoing.

Ethical Loneliness

21

Groups of human beings can design just institutions, and they can also
create dehumanizing conditions. Améry writes, “The Flemish SS-man Wajs,
who—inspired by his German masters—beat me on the head with a
shovel whenever I didn’t work fast enough felt the tool to be an extension of his hand and the blows to be emanations of his psycho-physical
dynamics.”16 What Améry means (in addition to making a jab at Heidegger’s amoral phenomenology of tool use and perhaps also at his infamous membership in the Nazi Party) is that Wajs did not think of his actions in moral terms. He simply used a tool to do a job, and his job as he
saw it was to beat a man over the head with a shovel.
Levinas composed most of Existence and Existents during his five years
of captivity during World War II. He was more fortunate than Améry,
but to say so strains the meaning of the word “fortunate.”17 Because he
was naturalized as a French citizen and fighting in the French army,
he was sent to the Jewish barracks of a forced-labor camp rather than to
an extermination camp. He wasn’t tortured, and he still had access to some
books and to simple games played with fellow captives, but he writes, of
that time, that “free” men, women, and children all “stripped us of our
human skin. We were subhuman, a gang of apes.”18 He also describes his
sense of abandonment and the attendant difficulty of retaining the life of
the mind: “A small inner murmur, the strength and wretchedness of persecuted people, reminded us of our essences as thinking creatures, but we
were no longer part of the world.”19 Emerging from captivity meant learning that his whole family in Lithuania had been murdered by Nazis with
machine guns. He had lost the major part of what built his world. In such
conditions it may be difficult to reclaim one’s identity: who is left to corroborate it? His solace would be that his wife and daughter survived, and
they were able to begin to rebuild a life together. He rarely wrote about
this time of his life, but the dedication in French and English to Otherwise Than Being reads, “To the memory of those who were closest among
the six million assassinated by the National Socialists, and of the millions
on millions of all confessions and all nations, victims of the same hatred
of the other man, the same anti-semitism.”20 Below that dedication is
inscribed, in Hebrew, “To the memory of my father and master, Rabbi
Yehiel son of Abraham the Levite, my mother and guide, Dvora daughter of
Rabbi Moshe, my brothers Dov son of Rabbi Yehiel the Levite and Aminadav son of Yehiel the Levite, my father-in-law Rabbi Shmuel son of

22

Ethical Loneliness

Rabbi Gershon the Levite and my mother in law Malka daughter of Rabbi
Chaim. May their souls be clutched in the link of life.”21 He prefaces his
major work with both a general statement about victims of hatred or indifference and a personal record of the losses those forces imposed on his
life. His philosophy is animated by the need to address the cause of those
losses.
It is easy enough to take existence for granted if your life is easy enough
that you are able to do so. Margaret Walker writes, “Some of us who have
the good fortune to live in the safer parts of orderly societies in peaceful
times are able to float down a stream of largely unreflective concern with
implicit confidence that people will behave as they should in countless
contexts.”22 That is how daily life can become what Améry called it—a
“codified abstraction.” Millions of human beings do not have that form of
freedom. But even the easiest life will be punctuated by fatigue, weariness,
and indolence. And those resistances may reveal to those who choose to
look a relation to time and other beings that both redefines what a self is
and helps us understand that selves and worlds are not essences but are,
rather, cooperatively authored achievements and, as such, may be destroyed. That knowledge in turn clarifies a truth that is unintelligible if
we define the self as simply autonomous: it shows why all of us—not only
perpetrators of harms—all of us are responsible both for rebuilding destroyed selves and worlds and preventing their destruction in the first
place.

The Self
Human selves differ in some respects from other objects in the world,
which is why it is often harder to feel sovereign over another person than
it is over apples in one’s kitchen.23 Other human beings might tell themselves different stories than I would tell, about themselves or about me.
They might have different practices, resist my thoughts and plans, or they
might challenge my assumptions about myself, others, and the world. We
may tell ourselves we are sovereign selves because we wish that were true,
or because we’ve been taught that it is true, but surely we also do that
(when we do) because it is part of how we experience the world: most of
the time, other people do not perfectly control us, and we do not perfectly
control other people. Each of us has our own powers of liberty. In other
words, our selves may be cooperatively authored, but we are also auto-

Ethical Loneliness

23

nomos: we “give the law to ourselves.”24 At any given moment, the law
you give to yourself may not be one I have chosen. And we both may have
to reckon with what that means. But that does not land us back in a site
where autonomy amounts to the kind of self-sufficiency that gets to choose
what will affect the self.
Levinas, in his later work Otherwise Than Being, describes the human
self as compound, made up of parts we might call self, ego, and me, all
residing in a bodily frame that is vulnerable and undeniably affected
by others.25 He theorizes that subjectivity is subjection to other human
beings: the subject is a hostage, persecuted by the other, bearing infinite
responsibility and owed nothing in return—an alarming set of assertions.
Instead of describing an always-already autonomous being that is by
definition free to make decisions about right and value unaffected by
others, Levinas gives us a subject formed in heteronomy and responsive to
others long before freedom is possible. His intent is not to deny our freedom but to draw attention to the vulnerability that defines us as embodied beings and thus bears on what freedom can be for us.
Here is roughly how self-formation “works” for Levinas: The “me” part
of the self senses the demand of an other, responds despite itself, and thus
is pressed by a responsibility it never chose. And so it tries to escape. It
flees into itself to evade the demands of responsibility. But when the “me”
retreats into the self, it finds the ego there already having taken up residence. That movement of the “me” into the self interrupts the sovereignty
that the ego formerly thought it possessed. Note that this self-revelation
occurs in interior space but is put in motion by what is not-me—“the
other”—and thus I am “ego” and “me” and “other” all at once, deep within
myself. I am separate and invaded at the same time. The ego will still insist
on its existential solitude and will operate as if it were perfectly autonomous, owing nothing it didn’t choose to owe. But the “me” will continuously interrupt the ego’s assertion of independence, because it will keep
trying to retreat inward to escape the demands placed on it by the presence of others—and all of this transpires fairly constantly in waves of
affectivity wrought by human sense.26
Levinas’s description of the human self helps to counter a tendency to
accept an unproblematic autonomy as the defining feature of humanity.
If the self just is defined as exposed, vulnerable, and formed in part in
relation to others, it may make it more intelligible for us why human
beings are able to destroy the selves and worlds of other human beings.

24

Ethical Loneliness

It also does justice to the depth of the attachments we form, since vulnerability is not only a negative asset: it may open us to abuse, oppression,
and death, but it also makes possible friendship, solidarity, and love. It is
deeply engrained in the Western self to define its relation to others in terms
of its autonomy: others are out there and I choose to interact with them
from within the protected site of my self. Levinas describes the encounter
otherwise, arguing that the presence of others
signifies not the disclosure of a given and its reception, but the exposure of me to the other, prior to every decision. There is a claim laid
on the same by the other in the core of myself, the extreme tension of
the command exercised by the other in me over me, a traumatic hold
of the other on the same, which does not give the same the time to
await the other.27

It isn’t that I find myself at the start fully self-sufficient and capable of
deciding for or against solidarity with others. Rather, others have already
laid claim on me, called me to respond to them before I am able to choose
to be affected. Self-formation is like a trauma striking against a self that
would be autonomous. That may give us a richer sense of what it means
to be a human being in general, but it also speaks directly to the sense of
self inhabited by survivors of violence, who may find it more difficult to
give themselves the useful fiction of autonomy. As Judith Herman puts
it, “Traumatic events destroy the victim’s fundamental assumptions about
the safety of the world, the positive value of the self, and the meaningful
order of creation.”28 A trauma survivor’s sense of the self’s independence
has been interrupted by violence. That sense is part of what should be restored by transitional justice or reconciliative efforts. But just as law cannot tell us whether or not we should obey law, autonomy cannot instruct
us in how to restore it where it has been lost or never gained in the first
place.

Ethical Loneliness
Let’s consider Levinas’ description the self’s finite freedom and its relation to others again, this time with a view to describing ethical loneliness.
In Existence and Existents, Levinas begins by drawing our attention to
the impersonality of what he calls the there is. It is the brute fact of exis-

Ethical Loneliness

25

tence, indifferent to human plans, and yet always there rumbling in the
background. These are the conditions in which a human being becomes
something substantive against the backdrop of impersonal existence. A
human being, unlike a chair or a sandwich, can take on her own being
and thereby become a substance that carries existence, a consciousness
bearing stable attributes. Levinas writes: “It is this coming out of a self,
this appropriation of existence by an existent, which the ‘I’ is [qu’est le
«je»].”29 So each of us attains possession of the first-person pronoun “I”
by turning the event of our self into the substance of our self, by taking
on the present moment freely: by doing something and being something
other than a chair or a sandwich.
However, this assuming of Being is not a simple freedom, because the
self finds itself stuck in an existential solitude. No matter how broad a
freedom your consciousness might devise, it is unceasingly riveted to your
own self. Self and ego, body and mind, these are one. As Levinas puts it,
“the freedom which is accomplished in cognition does not free the mind
from every fate.”30
So, I am stuck with myself, alone in my human frame. But the formation of my self occurs as a desire for escape from that solitude. I want
out. But every attempt at standing outside the self—say, in sex, intoxication, sleep, reading, or viewing art, and so on—leads one back to the self.
Indeed, every attempt at ec-stasis is made by means of the materiality of
the body, and so the means of escape is also the ultimate reminder of one’s
being riveted, without parole, to one’s own existence: you finish, sober up,
or wake up right there in the same inescapable location: your self. The
desire to escape the self is endless because it is impossible.
But therein lies a hope. I am riveted to my own existential solitude. But
the other, an other human being, opens doors that would not exist in a
world without others. That is true because the other human being is
exterior to me in a way different from the way a sandwich or a chair is
exterior to me. An other human being has her own self, his own solitude,
and thus the space between us is intersubjective space, freighted with a
giving of signs that precedes communication in language, as well as the
possibility of bringing “me” out of myself and into a world.
So, we have (1) the indifference of brute existence, (2) human beings
transcending brute existence by taking on the present moment and becoming selves, (3) selves finding themselves stuck with themselves, unable to
escape but desiring escape, and (4) a way out offered by the presence of

26

Ethical Loneliness

others. A self is not truly in a world until consciousness becomes communication. Research takes form as a question.
In the camps Améry lost his intellectual solitude, his love of the life of
the mind, but that was not the measure of his ethical loneliness. Torture,
internment, and dehumanization forced on him a condition of existential
solitude—stuck-in-himself—but one where the way out offered by another
human being was refused to him. Ethical loneliness begins when a human
being, because of abuse or neglect, has been refused the human relation
necessary for self-formation and thus is unable to take on the present moment freely.

Stories, Part 2
In 1980 in South Africa, Charity Kondile’s son was killed by Dirk Coetzee
and members of a counterinsurgency unit of the police.31 More than ten
years passed between her son, Sizwe’s, disappearance and her learning
what had befallen him. One day Mrs. Kondile picked up a newspaper
reporting on testimony at a commission put together to investigate that
police unit. She read there that her son had been apprehended, tortured
to the point of having a brain hemorrhage, given poison to kill him, which
didn’t work, then transported to a remote farm and shot, and finally
burned in a fire. In her testimony before the South African Truth and
Reconciliation Commission (TRC) she says,
Well Dirk Coetzee goes on further to say that when he died, they put
his body on a pile of wood with a tyre near the Komatiepoort River
at night, where it took them nine hours to burn his body. Dirk Coetzee further states that twice they were burning his body, the flesh was
smelling good, and they were having beers at the time. So it was like
a braai [barbecue] to them.32

Her testimony also covers how the lives of her family were transformed
by their loss: Sizwe’s sister suffering from depressive psychosis, a brother
so depressed he cannot take care of himself, a child left fatherless, and
Mrs. Kondile herself, the mother, who, instead of being supported by the
surrounding community, was treated like a traitor when her son disappeared because those who knew him too quickly assumed he had betrayed
his cause. As she puts it,

Ethical Loneliness

27

I was very disappointed to learn that people who had been so friendly
to my son about six months [before he disappeared] should have
turned against him so soon, and according to Mark Antony, when he
says, “Oh judgment thou art fled to brutish [beasts] and men have
lost their reason,” that’s a quotation I taught, that it seems . . . when
I’m so anguished, looking for him, these people would not sympathize
with me, they would still think I was telling lies.33

It is a dynamic story of loss. Mrs. Kondile did not only lose a son. She
lost the sense that she could expect that she and her loved ones would be
protected from harm. She also lost the security of living in a community
where she could trust that, if she were to be harmed, she would be helped,
and her harms recompensed. Like Améry, she lost the sense both that she
could expect just treatment and that she would be offered help if treated
unjustly. She lost a world, and so she lost some of the conditions necessary for coherent self-formation.
Susan Brison took a walk by herself on a rural lane in France one day,
where she was hit from behind, forced to the side of the road, beaten, and
raped. Her attacker then tried to strangle her to death multiple times,
dragging her into a ravine and leaving her there for dead. Recovery from
such treatment is more than a nursing of wounds—and of those she had
plenty: multiple head injuries, a fractured trachea, a body covered with
scratches and bruises, and both her eyes swollen shut.34 Brison writes of the
experience, “I had ventured outside the human community, landed beyond
the moral universe, beyond the realm of predictable events and comprehensible actions, and I didn’t know how to get back” (ix–x). Extreme violence delivered a message to her: that her self’s own sovereignty remains
intact only as long as others observe its boundaries. And so she, like Améry,
lost her trust in the world: “The fact that I could be walking down a quiet,
sunlit country road at one moment and be battling a murderous attacker
the next undermined my most fundamental assumptions about the world”
(26). This is the trauma of loss of safety. In particular, it is the loss of the
sense the lucky among us have that other human beings will treat us as
human beings rather than as objects to be disposed of or abused at will.
Brison learned this from being attacked. But the message was delivered
in all its complexity as she worked to recover. She discovered that her new
self had to be one that was painfully aware that selves are “both autonomous and socially dependent, vulnerable enough to be undone by

28

Ethical Loneliness

violence and yet resilient enough to be reconstructed with the help of empathic others” (38)—and that getting the help of others is a complicated
thing. Not only in cases of rape but also in muggings, cancer diagnoses,
and bad fortune in general there is a will in the human self to believe it
could not happen to “me” and so a distancing of that self from a hard
truth of any trauma story: that it could happen to anyone.35 Schooled in
the idea of personal autonomy, we don’t easily receive lessons about “the
limits of the individual’s capacity to control her own self-definition.”36
We are vulnerable creatures prey to harm, and most of our fellow beings
on whom these evils befall do nothing to deserve them. But we want to
believe it could not happen to us, so we may look for “reasons” why it
has happened to someone else, and we may even avoid those who have
been mistreated. Brison mentions how various of her extended family
and friends, who would surely have sent cards if she were hospitalized
for an appendectomy, remained silent.37 If asked to defend themselves,
each one of them would, we can guess, surely say that she or he did not
know what to say in response to such a grave harm. But if the murderous
twentieth and twenty-first centuries have taught us anything, surely it is
that saying or doing nothing is another harm. Brison writes, “Each time
someone failed to respond, I felt as though I were alone again in the ravine, dying, screaming. And still no one could hear me. Or, worse, they
heard me, but refused to help.”38
Returning to the moment of trauma is a symptom of trauma. But if
such trauma is caused in part by a failure of protection, and failure of
protection indicts not only those who inflicted harm but also all those
who contribute to the world where such harms happen in widespread or
systematic ways, then we are all responsible—to varying degrees—for
recovery from and prevention of such harms. Lack of response to harm is
what rendered Améry unable to move forward. In particular he could not
forget “the sight of the Germans on a small passenger platform where,
from the cattle cars of our deportation train, the corpses had been unloaded and piled up; not on a single one of their stony faces was I able to
detect an expression of abhorrence.”39 Those bystanders may have been
bigoted and full of hatred, they may have thought Jews were subhuman,
or they may instead have been afraid to show any discomfort with what
was happening in a totalitarian state where whatever Hitler ordered was
law. The point to take away from this, in this instance, is that it doesn’t
matter to Améry what drives their indifference, just as it may not matter

Ethical Loneliness

29

to Brison what led some of her friends and family to ignore her injuries
and fail to hear her story, or to Kondile what made her neighbors call her
son a traitor and fail to help her through a terrible ordeal. Having undergone an unjust injury at the hands of other human beings, Améry, Kondile, and Brison needed to have the wrongness of what befell them confirmed and denounced, not mainly by legal institutions or perpetrators but
by the surrounding society in which they would have to live henceforth.
They all needed help rebuilding a destroyed world. Walker argues that
“victims of wrongful harm often experience as much or more rage, resentment, indignation, or humiliation in response to the failure of other
people and institutions to come to their aid, acknowledge their injury,
reaffirm standards, place blame appropriately on wrongdoers, and offer
some forms of solace, safety and relief as victims experience toward the
original wrongdoer.”40 That is a way of saying that survivors seek release
from ethical loneliness, the sense of having been abandoned by humanity.
They want the harms they have undergone to be heard and the wrongness of them affirmed in a lasting way not only by the perpetrators but
also by the surrounding society. They seek the help of others to reassure
them that they are living in a world with others, one where they will be
protected when they are under threat. Only in conditions such as those
might they be able to take existence for granted, or take on the present
moment freely.
The reasons why support systems failed in these three cases are of
course very different given the different cultural and historical contexts.
But we can observe something about the failures that caused feelings of
abandonment in these differently situated persons. Each person testifies
to having been pushed beyond the confines of the shared human world
into a space of abandonment by violence or oppression. Each experiences
a difficulty in getting the story she or he most wants to tell heard on its
own terms. And each person, while singular and deserving of justice on
that scale, surely stands for a wider experience of failure and abandonment that also requires redress. All of that will matter to a discourse
of reconciliation. As the handbook Reconciliation after Violent Conflict
puts it,
Good democratic politics—even the best politics—only work when relationships between the various actors are positive enough to permit
basic trust, respect and cooperation. Bad relationships—those still

30

Ethical Loneliness

built on distrust, suspicion, fear, accusation, even ignorance—will effectively and eventually destroy any political system based on respect
for human rights and democratic structures.41

In every scene of reconciliation there is a complicated series of bad relationships. Trials, truth commissions, and like institutions can’t change
them on their own, and unless those relationships can be transformed, law
and the truth are not sufficient to get the job of reconciliation done. Continuing ethical loneliness is one expression of a failure after grave harm
to restore—or, in many cases, to build for the first time—social relationships or, at the very least, conditions of meaningful safety.

Loneliness
Recovery from mass violence and historic injustice is a complex affair, especially since recent scientific and psychological research has also shown
that what is true of trauma is also true of loneliness: it rewrites genetic
codes and hormonal signals, causes illness, and slows ability to recover.42
It negatively impacts one’s trust in the world. In 1958 Frieda FrommReichmann argued that loneliness was at the heart of most mental illness,
but that loneliness is not the solitude of the writer, the isolation of the
artist, or the seclusion of the person waiting to recover from illness—
rather, it is the want of intimacy. Since then psychologists have shown that
closeted gay men suffering from AIDS-related illnesses are more likely to
die quickly than those who have a support system; that college freshmen
are the most unhappy not when they have few friends but when they have
no close friends; that social exclusion, even if it is only imagined, lights
up the same part of the brain where physical pain is expressed; that
babies who are not held and cared for show irregular brain development;
that baby monkeys kept isolated from their mothers and all other
monkeys do not develop the ability to mingle with other monkeys; that in
monkeys kept from their mothers for the first four months of life immunity-related genes are suppressed; but that when those monkeys are delivered over to foster care, “about half of their genetic deviations vanished”;
and so on.43 There is something telling about this, that even once we have
read the studies relying on listening to excluded persons or scanning the
brains of people isolated by social forces, some would still want the kind

Ethical Loneliness

31

of proof that comes from abusive treatment of animals—and all this, for
what? To prove that we need one another.
And so, while I might agree with the conclusions of scientists who have
shown that the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex of the brain lights up
equally when we are rejected as when we are physically harmed—meaning that the affective component of pain is similar in both situations—I
doubt we need to isolate baby monkeys in order to prove that we are
caught in the sway of our relations to others both affectively and rationally. After all, “a study of 8000 identical Dutch twins found that, if one
twin reported feeling lonely and unloved, the other twin would report the
same thing 48 percent of the time. This figure held so steady across pairs
of twins . . . that researchers concluded that it had to reflect genetic, not
environmental influence.”44 But even if that study gives us an accurate picture of how genes might influence human loneliness, 52 percent of what
makes twins (or anyone else) grow up lonely comes from the surrounding world.45 And so, the surrounding world is likely to make all the
difference.
There is a loneliness that comes from being alone, from losing love or
a loved one, or from feeling out of step with one’s surroundings. That loneliness, whether fleeting or desperate, still has a world. Other people may
recognize it and offer help. Social support may compensate for loss. It
would be a category mistake to equate such loneliness with the abandonment undergone by those whose selves and world have been destroyed
by human violence. Améry and Kondile—and, to a lesser extent, Brison—
had multiple layers of isolation imposed on them. The differences in extent come not from what harms befell them but from the surrounding
world’s response: for Brison, a successful court case and sexual violence
support groups helped her rebuild a world where she could live, even if
she would never fully regain the sense of safety she once had. But even
Brison experienced what for Améry and Kondile truly compounded their
devastation: the silence and inaction of others. There are layers of betrayal
in all these cases. Some of Brison’s friends and relatives stood by her, listened carefully to her painful story, and lent support over the long period
required for recovery. But some did not. Kondile’s loss was orchestrated
not only by the police who killed her son and the government that authorized that killing but also by members of her community who believed he
was a traitor and officials both of the government and of community or-

32

Ethical Loneliness

ganizations who did not apologize for treating her family unjustly. Améry’s
continuing resentment was aimed not only at those who participated
in his destruction but also at those who stood by while it happened, the
younger generation that seemed to him to be sick of hearing about what
their parents had done, and even at the silence of many of his fellow
camp survivors. In all three cases, many of those who acted wrongly—or
who simply did not contribute to rebuilding selves and worlds—are not
what the law would call perpetrators. Neighbors, friends, relatives, the
next generation, even fellow survivors, most of them people who never
intended harm—all implicated. And so all three cases point to why responsibility for rebuilding worlds and selves after conflict must fall widely
rather than focusing narrowly on law’s story about criminal culpability.
I’ll develop this point throughout the book.
Améry, Kondile, and Brison all have some choice in how they tell the
stories of what happened to them, to themselves and to others. But they
lack control over what stories will be heard and who will listen—even
when they speak to themselves. That is true of all of us, but, as chapter 3
shows, how this affects us varies according to power and luck. If stories
lack support, they may begin to seem unreal, even to those who lived them.
Human life, even in its privacy, relies on a cooperatively authored world.
For those whose world has been destroyed, the absence of a willing audience is a second harm compounding the original violation.46 Ending up
pinned to the wrong story or no story at all might make recovery impossible, tying futures to past injuries. As Levinas has shown, research takes
form as a question. Even my capacity to own my own intellectual solitude relies on my ability to trust that I am part of a world and that I can
expect just treatment and help when I need it; it is already a form of sociality. Barbara Hernnstein Smith has written that narrative consists of
“someone telling someone else something that happened.”47 It is not accomplished by a person acting alone. Susan Brison adds that narrative “is
a social interaction—actual or imagined or anticipated or remembered—
in which what gets told is shaped by the (perceived) interests of the listeners, by what the listeners want to know and also by what they cannot
or will not hear.”48 A survivor whose story cannot or will not be heard
is likely also someone whose harms have not yet been addressed. And if
that is true, it is likely also true that social conditions do not yet exist
that would make successful political transition or societal reconciliation
possible.

Ethical Loneliness

33

Nietzsche says a similar thing in a different way. He admits that we
don’t get to choose all our influences, and that those influences work on
us in ways we do and do not consciously note. In Daybreak he writes,
“Out of damp and gloomy days, out of solitude, out of loveless words
directed at us, conclusions grow up in us like fungus: one morning they
are there, we know not how, and they gaze upon us.”49 We aren’t sole
masters of who we are—we are molded by our relations to others. Those
relations and the larger world form us, and then we find others within ourselves (as Levinas also describes), judging us for who we are and aren’t, in
ways that may or may not be fair. We tell these stories to ourselves at least
in part because our selves and worlds are cooperatively authored things.
But Nietzsche also writes the following: “Woe to the thinker who is
not the gardener but only the soil of the plants that grow up in him.”50
You can take what is given, what you didn’t get to choose, and live with
it in many different ways. As chapter 4 shows, this means that the past is
subject to revisions that may make the present moment more—or less—
livable for those whose unjust pasts should have been otherwise. Nietzsche
would have each of us create new worlds by the sheer power of our individual wills. But capacity to do that may also vary according to power
and luck. (Indeed, Nietzsche, Améry, and Brison all had deep experience
of the kind of “unreflective concern” that allows a person to take existence for granted before they underwent harm—or, in Nietzsche’s case,
illness. Many survivors have never had the liberty of that experience, and
so the stories they tell say different things—as we will see in chapters 3
and 5.) So maybe what we aim to do, when we undertake a revisionary
practice like a truth commission, transitional justice, or any of the various alternatives to those that spring up wherever harm needs repair, is to
create conditions where all have equal power, each to be gardener of her
own self. But, as the analysis of ethical loneliness begins to show, and the
next chapters demonstrate, it will take more than the rule of law, individual responsibility, or faith in the liberatory power of political autonomy to make that possible.

