03-schaffersmith

5/6/04

9:47 AM

Page 1

CONJUNCTIONS: LIFE NARRATIVES
IN THE FIELD OF HUMAN RIGHTS
KAY SCHAFFER AND SIDONIE SMITH

The last decades of the twentieth century witnessed the unprecedented rise
in genres of life writing, narratives published primarily in the West1 but circulated widely around the globe. This “memoir boom” has certainly occurred
in English-speaking countries, from Australia to Jamaica, from England to
South Africa, and in European countries, especially France and Germany.2
However, there has been a relative boom in personal narratives coming from
elsewhere in the world as well. In many global locations, in post-Maoist
China and Latin America, in North Africa and the Philippines, in Northern
and Eastern Europe, life narratives have been told, transcribed, published,
and translated, gaining both local and international audiences.
This rise in the popularity of published life narratives has taken place in
the midst of global transformations, both cataclysmic and gradual, that have
occurred in the decades since the end of World War II: a succession of wars
of prolonged and short duration; repeated instances of mass genocide in
Cambodia, Rwanda, Bosnia, and elsewhere; violent and nonviolent decolonization movements in South America and Africa; the intensification and
dissipation of the Cold War in Europe; mass migrations of peoples; and the
speed of change and the fragmentation of contemporary life. These geopolitical and temporal transformations form not so much a backdrop, but
rather a fractured web of intersecting geographic, historical, and cultural
contingencies out of which personal narratives have emerged and within
which they are produced, received, and circulated. These global transformations have spurred developments in the field of human rights as well, developments that demand, for their recognition in the international community, multiple forms of remembrance of and witnessing to abuse.
To situate the contemporary interest in life narratives in the field of
human rights, it is necessary to recall briefly the origins of the Universal
Biography 27.1 (Winter 2004) © Biographical Research Center

03-schaffersmith

2

5/6/04

9:47 AM

Page 2

Biography 27.1 (Winter 2004)

Declaration of Human Rights in the contentious and passionate debates of
the mid-twentieth century. At the end of World War II, the incontrovertible
evidence of the violence unleashed in the Japanese and German war efforts
and of Nazi mass killings created an international climate of moral indignation. As this moral indignation attached itself to the modernist values and
principles of the victors, the international community renewed its commitment to a “United Nations” of peoples dedicated to the pursuit of peace and
the protection of human rights. In relatively swift succession came the signing of the Charter of the United Nations in 1945, the Nuremberg and
Tokyo war crimes trials in 1945–46 and 1946–48 respectively, and the ratification by the United Nations of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights in 1948. The Nuremberg trials in particular issued a call to the world
community to remember crimes against humanity. As an expression of
ideals, the Universal Declaration became the point of origin binding an international community together in service to a more just future.
Debates about, refinements of, and votes on the Universal Declaration
and its accompanying Covenants—one on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR)
and a second on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR)—took
place in the two decades following 1948 through movements of decolonization and Cold War politics. Whether violent or relatively peaceful, movements of national liberation from colonial rule, founded on the right to the
self-determination of peoples laid out in the ICCPR, involved complex
negotiations, by states, communities, and individuals, of the psychological,
political, economic, and cultural legacies of a colonial past that had to be
remembered, made, and remade for the sake of national futures. For its part,
the Cold War effectively remapped the globe through spheres of influence
that displaced earlier spheres of colonialism. Cold War politics also sparked
contentious debates within the United Nations about the nature of rights,
particularly the relative priority of “negative” rights that protect individuals
from the state and “positive” rights that pertain to aspirational goals and an
enabling standard of living that might extend human dignity and freedom
for everyone.
In the aftermath of the processes of decolonization movements and Cold
War realpolitik, over sixty human rights treaties, declarations, and Conventions have come into effect to address specific rights. For the last fifty years,
differences in philosophical perspectives related to negative, positive, and
group rights, as well as disagreements about appropriate interventions and
modes of redress, have been rehearsed in local, national, and international
venues. Campaigns have ensued. Conventions and Declarations have taken
shape after heated negotiations. The reach of rights discourse has extended

03-schaffersmith

5/6/04

9:47 AM

Page 3

Schaffer and Smith, Conjunctions

3

beyond the institutional settings of the United Nations and the official bodies of nation-states responding to rights initiatives to formal NGO networks
and informal meshworks of advocacy—the dense and nonhierarchical flows
of connections among groups and peoples working on behalf of human rights
that transcend national boundaries (Harcourt). Within these global information flows, the very meaning of a human right, and the foundational assumptions supporting it, have been challenged, critiqued, and redefined. At the
heart of these debates, voices of dissent have prompted ongoing critiques of
human rights discourse, frameworks, and mechanisms for implementation.
RIGHTS AND STORIES

By the last decades of the century, the modernist language of rights had
become a lingua franca for extending—sometimes explicitly, sometimes
implicitly—the reach of human rights norms, not everywhere, but across an
increasingly broad swath of the globe. Post-World War II struggles for
national self-determination and equality for women, indigenous peoples,
and minorities within nation-states led to the rise of local and transnational
political movements and affiliations—movements for Black and Chicano
civil rights, women’s rights, gay rights, workers’ rights, refugee rights, disability rights, and indigenous rights among them—all of which have created
new contexts and motivations for pursuing personal protections under
international law. In each instance, personal storytelling motivated the rights
movement. These collective movements have gained momentum and clarified agendas for action through attachment to the goals of the Universal
Declaration and attendant discourses, events, and mechanisms. The collective movements have also argued for new claims, pressing for reinterpretations of rights frameworks, and lobbying for Covenants and Declarations
that expand the kinds of rights that require recognition and protection.
In the 1960s, group action and advocacy led to the adoption of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (1969).
In the 1970s, women’s and feminist activism led to the adoption of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women
(1981). In the 1990s, trade union and indigenous advocacy led to the adoption of the International Labor Organization Convention 169 concerning
Indigenous and Tribal Peoples (1991) and the Draft Declaration on the
Rights of Indigenous People (1993). Together, these latter two instruments,
if and where ratified, could significantly alter the parameters of rights discourse in that they acknowledge and support group rather than individual
rights, encompassing the aspirations of indigenous and minority peoples for

03-schaffersmith

4

5/6/04

9:47 AM

Page 4

Biography 27.1 (Winter 2004)

self-determination and their claims to culture, language, religion, and land
rights, sometimes in opposition to states’ claims of sovereignty. In the early
1990s, rights activists lobbied for the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
In this evolving culture of rights, personal witnessing plays a central role
in the formulation of new rights protections, as people come forward to tell
their stories in the contexts of tribunals and national inquiries. In its role as
an advocate for peaceful forms of civic engagement within nations and across
nations, the United Nations itself has generated audiences for local stories
muted within the dominant cultures of member states through its “decade”
strategy; that is, through the targeting of a particular group and the concentration of attention on its issues for a decade, as in the International Decade
for Women (1975–1984) and the International Decade of Indigenous Peoples (1995–2004).
Local movements that “go national” or “international” often generate
climates that enable the reception and recognition of new stories, attaining
what Gillian Whitlock refers to as a “discursive threshold” (144). Emergent
in communities of identification marginalized within the nation, such movements embolden individual members to understand personal experience as a
ground of action and social change. Collective movements seed local acts of
remembering “otherwise,” offering members new or newly valued subject
positions from which to speak and to address members of their own community in acts of solidarity. They also offer members of the dominant community occasions for witnessing to human rights abuse, acknowledging and
affirming the rights of others. Through acts of remembering, individuals and
communities narrate alternative or counter-histories coming from the margins, voiced by other kinds of subjects—the tortured, the displaced and overlooked, the silenced and unacknowledged—among them. These counterhistories emerge in part out of the formerly untold tales of those who have
not benefited from the wealth, health, and future delivered to many others
by the capital and technologies of modernity and postmodernity. Individuals and groups may also engage in narrative acts of critical self-locating
through which they assert their cultural difference and right to self-determination, or they may imagine leaving the past behind for a new social order
or a newly empowered collective subjectivity. Members of collective movements deploy personal narrating to witness many forms of trauma—sexual
violence and abuse, economic and political degradation, racism, terrorism,
and forms of genocide. Their stories enable new forms of subjectivity and
radically altered futures.
In authoritarian, fundamentalist, and rigidly patriarchal nations, including some newly constituted Asian, Islamic, and other democratic states, where

03-schaffersmith

5/6/04

9:47 AM

Page 5

Schaffer and Smith, Conjunctions

5

victims may be unable or unwilling to speak publicly, professional rights
advocates may seek out stories of abuse from victims, speak on their behalf,
and frame their stories within the field of human rights. Often these stories
must be solicited and circulated anonymously by NGOs. This has often
been the case in relation to non-Western women telling stories of sexual,
domestic, religious, and cultural inequality and oppression. In such contexts,
activist framing may enfold the narrative within the individualist, humanist,
and secular frameworks of Western rights, overwriting the customs and
beliefs of the victims. Local campaigns, particularly those that involve stories
of violence against women, have been most successful when local activism is
harnessed to an international rights movement. In these instances, transits
between the local and global and within pockets of modernity involve complex negotiations of traditional and modernist discourses and practices.3 In
other instances, stories may be framed within traditional, communal, religious, or philosophic frameworks different from, but arguably consonant
with, modernist aspirations for human dignity and social justice.
Since the late 1980s, wide-scale transformations—geographic, economic, political, cultural, and psychic—have also impelled people to tell their
stories. These include the opening of the Berlin wall, the collapse of the Soviet Union into ethnic states pursuing agendas of ethnic nationalism, the end
of the policy of apartheid in South Africa, the global movements of indigenous peoples to reclaim lands and have their cultures acknowledged, the
changing demography of the new Europe through immigration, the rise
(and collapse) of Asian economies and the expansion of the Asian diaspora,
the refugee crises around the globe, and before and after September 11,
2001, the rise of international religious fundamentalisms. Unprecedented
global unrest has called forth and called for repeated acts of remembering,
through which people reclaim identities at home, in transit, and in new communities and nations.
The violence unleashed by resurgent ethnic nationalisms at the end of
the Cold War has multiplied the number of people displaced into refugee
camps, and dispersed into welcoming and not-so-welcoming nations, intensifying the distress of dislocation in recovery and in peace. The proliferation
and increasing reach of ethnic diasporas through mass migrations has brought
about displacements of peoples, values, and identifications, often motivating
the reconstitution of communities of tradition in exile. Ongoing processes of
decolonization have led people released from their colonized status to struggle with the internalized, psychic legacies of colonization. In white settler
nations, indigenous struggles to survive state-sponsored acts of oppression
compel acts of witnessing to a past erased in official histories of the nation.

03-schaffersmith

6

5/6/04

9:47 AM

Page 6

Biography 27.1 (Winter 2004)

Within different democratic nation-states, the rise of the politics of multiculturalism and diaspora, and calls for recognition of the claims of indigenous groups, have challenged conventional understandings of the relationship of ethnicity and indigeneity to citizenship. As a result, new or newly
identified citizen-subjects reimagine the grounds of their communal identities, test the individualist ethos of the UDHR, and contest master narratives
of national belonging and identity.
Forces of turmoil, often violent, move individuals, communities, ideas,
cultural forms, and economic wealth around the globe in ways that unsettle
old identities and understandings of the past, and presage the imagining of
possible futures. Such dislocations of identity unsettle psychically experienced understandings of time (the before, the now, the possible future),
space (the old place, the new place), subjectivity (the me I used to be and the
me I am becoming), and community (the ones to which I used to belong and
the ones of which I am now a member). The scrambling of zones of time,
space, subjectivity, and community engenders new patterns of remembering
and new modes of response on the part of individuals, communities, and
nations. The condensations and expansion of temporal and spatial dimensions of past and present set in motion rememberings of old selves and imaginings of new selves, rememberings of old belongings and allegiances and
new ones in the diasporic spaces of dispersed, postmodern communities and
nations (Baucom 160–62). While some people may be reluctant narrators,
preferring to forget or forestall the pain of unrest, dislocation, and exile, others may be energized to tell their stories in order to work through the political and social, psychic and embodied residues of trauma and loss. Furthermore, displaced, migrant, and diasporic people arrive at destinations where
different discursive fields and different histories of activism offer new terms
and storytelling modes (sometimes foreign, sometimes familiar; sometimes
shunned, sometimes embraced) through which they might remember, interpret, understand, reconstruct, and come to terms with a complex past.
In the midst of dislocations and relocations, personal and collective storytelling can become one way in which people claim new identities and assert
their participation in the public sphere. It can also become a way of maintaining communal identification in the face of loss and cultural degradation.
Or it can be enlisted in witnessing to the failures of democratic nations to
realize and live up to their democratic principle of inclusive citizenship, making visible rents in the social fabric that undermine unified narratives of
national belonging. In all cases, storytelling functions as a crucial element in
establishing new identities of longing (directed toward the past) and belonging (directed toward the future).

03-schaffersmith

5/6/04

9:47 AM

Page 7

Schaffer and Smith, Conjunctions

7

THE LITERATURE OF TRAUMA AND THE HOLOCAUST

Stories emerging from collective rights movements and the cataclysmic
geopolitical displacements of the last two decades have been identified with
a larger body of literature concerning trauma and traumatic remembering.
The cultural focus on “trauma” in the last decades of the twentieth century,
arising out of feminism, psychoanalysis, and ethnic identity studies, motivated life writing that mapped and mined the disruptive effects of significant
events in the past. Circulating within professional, academic, and popular
perceptions of and discourses about trauma in the West, this literature has
become a prominent genre of personal narrating at the end of the twentieth
century. Journalistic reports, popular magazine articles, academic studies,
feminist activisms around sexual abuse, and medical diagnoses of Post Traumatic Stress Syndrome (officially accepted in 1980) as a condition suffered
by victims of the war in Vietnam—all have contributed to the public awareness in popular and academic domains of multiple forms of trauma and traumatic remembering.
In English-speaking and European cultures, the experience of trauma is
understood predominantly through psychoanalytic frameworks of interiority that describe trauma as self-altering and self-shattering, and acts of traumatic remembering as fitful, incomplete, and belated, caught in a “dialectic
between dissociation and compulsory repetition” (Ball 2). The literature of
“trauma” at once compels and sustains the contemporary practice of trauma
therapy specific to the West. Once this psychoanalytic understanding of
trauma and the healing process it underwrites take effect and become enlisted in human rights frameworks for telling and listening to stories, this psychoanalytic model spreads through global circuits into dispersed local sites.
This form of remembering presumes and prescribes a particular kind of
storytelling about the past. It also serves to locate narratives produced in dispersed global locations in the field of trauma and to reinterpret them as a
part of the contemporary literature about trauma.
Exemplary of the literature of traumatic remembering in the West have
been Holocaust stories and all that has come to signify “the Holocaust” as
the emblematic limit case of human rights abuse in the twentieth century. So
important and influential have Holocaust stories become, and so ingrained in
Western audiences invoking a pattern of response, that this signal event has
become a template for all forms of traumatic telling, response, and responsibility within the contemporary field of human rights.
In the last two decades of the century, an imperative for Holocaust survivors to work through the trauma of the past took on particular urgency

03-schaffersmith

8

5/6/04

9:47 AM

Page 8

Biography 27.1 (Winter 2004)

with the passing of the last generations of survivors. Popular and scholarly
audiences throughout the United States, Europe, Australia, and other Western nations have reacted profoundly to the resultant outpouring of Holocaust stories. Empathetic identification with witness and second-generation
testimony has prompted diverse readerships to respond ethically and to
explore the challenge of the ethical in the face of radical suffering. Individual and collective testimonies of survivors of the Holocaust have come to
comprise a significant literature in the field of human rights.
It is instructive to review the history through which the Holocaust and
Holocaust stories came to be exemplary of the literature of trauma, linking
that history back to the Nuremberg Trials at the end of World War II. The
Nuremberg trials, so much a part of the environment of outrage out of
which the regime of human rights had its inception, may have called Nazi
leadership to account, but did not focus on the systematic, mass killing of
Jews and others labeled “undesirable” by the Nazi regime as a crime against
humanity. The event that would later be labeled “the Holocaust,” and
become paradigmatic in defining the limits of unimaginable and unspeakable trauma in the latter part of the twentieth century in the West, had not
yet reached a discursive threshold of intelligibility (Stratton). That would
take another thirty years.4
The first turning point came in 1961, when the Eichmann Trial in Israel
televised to the world the testimony of survivors of the Nazi Judeocide, testimony that was accepted as evidentiary and took on juridical authority.
While the Eichmann Trial brought the horrors of the Nazi genocide to an
international audience, it did not provide a unifying discursive framework
for understanding the nature of the event as Holocaust, as an unprecedented traumatic world event exceeding the understanding of Jewish history as a
succession of pogroms (Arendt 35). Israeli success in the 1967 Six Day War
marked another turning point, affecting as it did the re-masculinization of
the Israeli nation. It also promoted transnational identification and affiliation between an Israeli and an American Jewry (Breines 72). The emergence
of an Israeli state with a history of victory, coupled with “the revival of the
public culture of countries humiliated by occupation and collaboration”
(Winter 55), provided an environment in which stories of the traumatic past
could be told and heard.
By 1978, the word “Holocaust” came to signal not only an event within Jewish history, but also a unique and unprecedented “world” (or European) experience. Personal memories of the Nazi genocide became part of a
public discourse beyond the personal, resonating within world cultural
memory. This transformation was aided by the proliferation of published life

03-schaffersmith

5/6/04

9:47 AM

Page 9

Schaffer and Smith, Conjunctions

9

narratives, films, and the immensely popular television mini-series Holocaust,
broadcast in the United States and subsequently in Europe (Breines 72).
Over the next decade, at academic conferences and in university courses,
scholars and students debated the ethics, politics, and aesthetics of Holocaust
representation with reference to the growing body of Holocaust narratives.
Exploring the status of witness “truth” and “genocide,” this work seeded the
emergence of the field of Holocaust Studies. Jon Stratton remarks that “it is
only when the Judeocide becomes discursively constructed as the Holocaust,
and as traumatic that there is a public space in which the traumas of Holocaust survivors make sense, not just as individual trauma, but as experiences
within a greater, cultural trauma” (6). In the context of the culture of trauma, the Holocaust story became commodified and reified as the premier
instance of traumatic remembering.
By the final decades of the twentieth century, as scenes of personal witness gave way to processes of historical recovery (Wajnryb 2), Holocaust
remembrance took many forms. The first and second generations of children
of Holocaust survivors enacted what Marianne Hirsch describes as “postmemory,” “a powerful form of memory” attached not to the event but to
images, stories, and transgenerational hauntings “mediated not through recollection but through projection, investment and creation” (9). In paintings,
websites, videos, and personal narratives, these children of survivors gave
meaning and structure to an event that had occurred outside their lifetimes
but nonetheless persisted through received memories and the residues of personal and cultural affect.5 Artists and activists dedicated to building and
maintaining an archive of testimony produced documentary and feature
films, and assembled exhibitions, oral histories, and video archives at various
places6—in Israel, the United States, Australia, the United Kingdom, the
Netherlands, and elsewhere.7 Communities built and sponsored memorials
and museums housing collections of photographs and witness testimony. All
of this occurred in an era when anti-Semitism and Holocaust denial were on
the rise (Winter 55).
The literature of trauma in the West, exemplified by Holocaust narratives, has become the dominant paradigm for understanding the processes of
victimization, remembering, witnessing, and recovery. And psychoanalysis
has provided the explanatory framework through which the survivor’s
embodiment of traumatic memory, explorations of the traumatic past, and
mourning and “working through” of trauma’s radical disruption in the present has been understood.8 Responses to these stories focus on ethical processes of responsibility and psychoanalytic understandings of the processes of
healing, both personal and cultural. Because of the paradigmatic status of

03-schaffersmith

10

5/6/04

9:47 AM

Page 10

Biography 27.1 (Winter 2004)

Holocaust stories and their interpretation as limit cases of trauma, the production, circulation, and reception of those stories have shaped modes of
response for other events, histories, and forms of suffering.
Recently, however, the universal applicability of a psychoanalytic model,
with its emphasis on the closed interiority of trauma, has been contested as
inadequate to address the diverse experiential histories, languages of suffering, structures of feeling, and storytelling modes evidenced in diverse cultural traditions around the world (Bennett and Kennedy 4). Critics argue
that the psychoanalytic model privileges stories suffused with traumatic
remembering and suffering, and silences other kinds of stories that may not
unfold through the Western trope of trauma (see Ball; Berlant; and Boler).
They argue that it universalizes diverse and multiple structures of feelings,
eliding gender, racial, and ethnic differences. It renders individual suffering
and psychic interiority the ground of trauma, making it difficult to register
the cultural transmission of stories and their imbrication in institutional and
political structures and practices. Furthermore, the psychoanalytic model of
trauma cannot adequately address the genealogies and architectures of cultural memory, such as those characterizing the evolution of “the Holocaust”
as it has come to be represented not only as story, but as preeminent event,
emblem, haunting, history, and transcendent myth on a world stage.
Though foundational to Holocaust studies, for millions of people elsewhere in the world this model for understanding trauma and processes of
healing may have little relevance to the ways in which people respond to and
deal with a past of suffering. Many cultures have adopted other ways of
understanding and figuring cataclysmic events, including genocide. For
example, in indigenous struggles in South America, liberationist theology
provides a model for resistance within the struggle and recovery in its aftermath. In some East Asian countries, shamanic inscription and Daoist modes
of spirit possession become experiential models and embodied forms of dealing with a traumatic past. In some Islamic fundamentalist contexts, Jihad
becomes a form of recovery from the past of degradation. In the immediate
face of radical suffering and distress, telling and healing can take more pragmatic forms, even in Western settings (see Rall).
STORIES AND MARKETS

These historical contingencies help us to understand larger global contexts
for the production of narratives of displacement, suffering, and trauma,
some but not all of which arise out of or are enlisted in human rights
activism. In order to more fully comprehend the force of storytelling in the

03-schaffersmith

5/6/04

9:47 AM

Page 11

Schaffer and Smith, Conjunctions

11

late twentieth century, we need also to consider the economic and cultural
forces imbricated in the local and global transits of circulation and reception
of life narratives.
Life narratives have become salable properties in today’s markets. They
gain their audiences through the global forces of commodification that convert narratives into the property of publishing and media houses (Baxi
40–41). Publishing houses in turn convert stories of suffering and survival
into commodified experiences for general audiences with diverse desires, and
also for an increasing number of niche audiences interested in particular
kinds of suffering. The expanding market for life stories coincides with the
increasing education, disposable income, and leisure time of the post-World
War II generations in Western democratic nations and pockets of modernities elsewhere around the globe. Postwar educational initiatives and modernization campaigns provided greater access to higher education, resulting
in a broader-based reading public and wider markets for stories.
Different communities around the globe, however, have differential levels of affluence, education, leisure, and access to media and print technologies. In relationship to print technologies, Philip G. Altbach notes that developing countries, which may have a public eager for stories from home and
elsewhere, often have a poorly developed publishing industry (2). In such
locations, a paucity of publishing venues seriously affects the ability to
“communicat[e] a culture” at the local and national levels, and within a global marketplace of commodities and ideas (3). The same point could be made
about the access of people in developing countries to nascent local and
national media outlets in the face of the globalizing force of Western syndicated and corporate media transmission. At this historical moment, telling life
stories in print or through the media by and large depends upon a Westernbased publishing industry, media, and readership. This dependence affects
the kinds of stories published and circulated, the forms those stories take,
and the appeals they make to audiences. That is, stories coming from local
sites around the world or from sites of exile, as they are taken up within
Western-dominated global information flows, may lose their local specificity
and resonance in translation. What is lost and gained in the local to global
transits affects patterns of recognition and redress in diverse and often unpredictable ways.
The “triumph” of global capitalism and the dominance of the West, particularly the United States, have meant that the culture of the individual, with
the belief in the individual’s uniqueness and unique story, and in individual
rights, has gained an international currency as it has been exported to ever
expanding areas of the globe. Interlocking media venues, serving the interests

03-schaffersmith

12

5/6/04

9:47 AM

Page 12

Biography 27.1 (Winter 2004)

of global capital, keep personal stories in various kinds of circulation. The
culture of talk shows feeds audience desires to hear other people’s stories.
Publishers seek out and put in print the personal narratives of celebrities of
all kinds: actors, politicians, sports figures, and the little people whose small
stories are made newsworthy for their fifteen minutes of fame due to a traumatic or freakish event (Massumi 3–4). Television producers turn out video
biographies, called biopics, to feed to the history channels or the channels
and programs targeted to engage the emotional sympathies of women.
Olympics coverage, broadcast around the world every two years, features
mini-biographies of star athletes, stories that enhance the investment that
viewers can have in the games, stimulating identification with personal
struggles to overcome adversity. The market for personal stories, often telling
of individualist triumph over adversity, of the “little person” achieving fame,
of people who struggle and survive illness, catastrophe, or violence, seems
insatiable to readers and viewers in the West, and is expanding with the media
reach of global capitalism.
Publishers and media conglomerates recognize that stories of suffering
and survival sell to readers. The marketing of these life stories takes place in
different cultures—of fear, suspicion, trauma, recognition, and advocacy. If
the post-World War II era began with new hopes for a transcendent future
and faith in democratic governments, the century ended with a sense of nostalgia, melancholy, and cynicism in the midst of communities fractured and
unsettled. Cataclysmic shifts in power relations and the movements of populations abroad and within a nation have bred a culture of fear, borne of
insecurities. Local identity movements within Western democratic states (gay,
feminist, and indigenous rights, to name a few) also foster insecurities, raising fears in others by challenging beliefs, relationships, and seemingly stable
identities, and by demanding recognition of different experiences and pasts.
Markets feed these insecurities and provide commodified stories through
which readers can reinvent imagined securities. Some readers may respond
to insecurities by enacting empathetic identification that recuperates stories
of radical differences into their more familiar frameworks of meaning. Such
acts of consumption of other peoples’ lives enable them to dispel the fear of
otherness by containing it. This type of recuperation occurred when Western feminist readers of Iman’s I Am Iman sensationalized African and Islamic women’s lives and translated their empathetic identification with Iman
into a white, Western-inflected campaign against the practice of cliterodectomy. In this case, empathetic identification became a means to the reader’s
own self-affirmation as an empowered agent, here an agent of social change
and humanitarian betterment.

03-schaffersmith

5/6/04

9:47 AM

Page 13

Schaffer and Smith, Conjunctions

13

Some readers may respond to the insecurities of fragmenting national
environments by recuperating stories of difference in ways that reconfirm
national myths and heroic fictions, as occurs when immigrant stories such as
Frank McCourt’s Angela’s Ashes and ’Tis, or indigenous stories such as Sally
Morgan’s My Place, are read as assimilation success stories. In the midst of
insecurities, some readers seek out stories as a means to displace their fears
and supplement the sense of their own modernist anxieties through the
vicarious consumption of other people’s lives. Or they may seek in those
lives opportunities for trying on different, more exotic, exhilarating, romantic, or outlaw identities. This kind of reading occurred when readers adopted characters of Armistead Maupin’s Tales of the City as if they were fragments of their own imagined lives.
Life narratives may also provide ways for readers to imagine the security
of a common past or common future in the midst of the fragmentation and
the pace of change of the present. If, as Jay Winter suggests, memory is “a
metaphor for a broader movement of uncertainty about how to frame the
past” (65), then narratives of personal remembering become sites for knowing the past differently in the present. Winter describes the capacious
absorption of stories of suffering in the United States as the compulsion to
recover the past, particularly for privileged, wealthy, educated urban elites.
For Andreas Huyssen, the commodification of storytelling is one way for the
culture to forestall postmodern fragmentation and the uncertainty of contemporary life by anchoring belief on some imagined foundation around
which people can keep at bay the impending forces of chaos. This openness
to remembering the past through the consumption of stories of trauma and
suffering reverberates with a desire of readers to believe in the promissory note
of modernism within the postmodern condition. Andreas Huyssen calls this
preoccupation with memory a “new imaginary of temporality” (16) in which
Western audiences feed their need to believe in the achievable goals of justice
and freedom, to keep faith in narratives of progress, and to believe in the efficacy of collective action against the overwhelming forces of fragmentation.
For other readers, sensationalized stories of suffering feed the darker passions of what Kirby Farrell labels the post-traumatic “wound” cultures of
postmodernity. Farrell describes post-traumatic culture as a culture desensitized to suffering, “a world in which power and authority seem staggeringly
out of balance, in which personal responsibility and helplessness seem crushing, and in which cultural meanings no longer seem to transcend death” (7).
In a post-traumatic environment, some readers seek out spectacles of suffering and trauma to fuel sadomasochistic fantasies and voyeuristic pleasures.
Identifying with perpetrators rather than victims, such readers may turn to

03-schaffersmith

14

5/6/04

9:47 AM

Page 14

Biography 27.1 (Winter 2004)

another person’s potential violence to both experience and exorcize their
own “post-traumatic demons” (Farrell 7). Others may turn to narratives of
suffering and trauma to feed their needs to “feel” something, anything, any
sensation, to experience some concatenation of affects and pleasures. This
“recourse to traumatic narratives,” argues Ball, “paradoxically serves simultaneously to defer, to organize, and to reproduce the low-grade angst” (19).
Despite the vagaries of the cultures of trauma and post-trauma, the insatiable reach of capital, the commodification of narratives of suffering, and
the standardizing forces of globalization, a counter-desire for local knowledge arises as local communities struggle to distance their stories from a
“panoptic mastering viewpoint” (Clarke 242; Baucom 161).9 In local sites of
struggle, a culture of disbelief and cynicism about “official” or normative
narratives of history, identity, and nation motivates people to narrate as well
as read stories that contradict, complicate, and undermine the grand modernist narratives of nation, progress, and enlightenment. These stories of cultural difference proliferate as voices of dissidence claim the legitimacy of
their local experiential histories. These are the stories that are told by people
who have been displaced into new communities and nations, or who have
been previously subjugated within their respective nations, who have broken
silence to tell the stories of racism, discrimination, and degradation, but also
of survival, resilience, and transformation. For readers who identify with collective movements, whether they are in them or not, narratives coming out
of a shared experience offer new avenues for activism and self-understanding,
new models of remembering. Such narratives can enable access to and potential recognition of the incommensurable differences between the teller’s
experience and that of the reader, making possible circuits of connection
across differences, and circuits of difference across connection. Although
always compromised, stories offer readers new ways of gaining knowledge
about peoples around the globe, calling into existence new cultural forms,
new modes of circulation, and new forms of civic engagement.
In the midst of the transits that take stories of local struggle to readerships around the world, NGOs and activists enlist stories from victims as a
way of alerting a broader public to situations of human rights violations. They
also solicit and package stories to attract readerships. The kinds of stories
they choose—sensationalized, sentimentalized, charged with affect—target
privileged readers in anticipation that they will identify with, contribute to,
and become advocates for the cause. The frames they impose on stories are
designed to capture the interest, empathy, and political responsiveness of
readers elsewhere, in ways they have learned will “sell” to publishers and audiences. NGOs harness their rights agendas to the market and its processes of

03-schaffersmith

5/6/04

9:47 AM

Page 15

Schaffer and Smith, Conjunctions

15

commodification. And yet, the processes of commodification are never fully
complete, nor are the efficacies of stories in action entirely predictable. Given
their imbrication in the flows of global capital and the commodification of
suffering, stories are received and interpreted in unpredictable ways by the
audiences whose attention they seek and garner.
PUBLISHED LIFE NARRATIVES AND HUMAN RIGHTS CAMPAIGNS

Published life narratives have contributed directly and indirectly to campaigns for human rights. Although this article addresses the conjunction of
narrated lives and human rights discourses and activism in the last twenty
years, this linkage between stories and actions extends back to the earliest
discussions of an international rights movement. As David Rieff notes, it was
a memoir that spurred the adoption of the Geneva Convention of 1864. In
A Memoir of Solferino (1859), Swiss humanitarian Henri Dunant witnessed
the carnage of the decisive battle of the Franco-Austrian war. The memoir
provided an affective springboard for subsequent debates about just and
unjust wars, leading to the founding of the International Committee of the
Red Cross and the adoption of the Geneva Convention.10 Rieff goes so far
as to suggest that “the conference at Geneva succeeded in translating the
reaction to the book into a body of law” (68–69).
In the last decades of the twentieth century, countless numbers of published narratives have fuelled and been fuelled by campaigns for human
rights. Told from diverse locations by diverse people, many of whom have
been previously silenced, they offer hybrid modes of telling stories, and
hybrid modes of mediating political, ethical, and aesthetic imperatives. Latin
American testimonio, the recorded and transcribed testimony of indigenous
and/or poor peoples, bears witness to collective struggles against massive
state violence and oppression. Postcolonial bildungsroman, the story of education into and for national citizenship, explores the possibilities for and
constraints limiting the decolonization of subjectivity in postcolonial worlds.
Survivor narratives tell stories of abuse through which narrators turn themselves from victims to survivors through acts of speaking out that shift attention to systemic causes of violation. Coming-out stories have played a critical role in campaigns to achieve human rights legislation for lesbians and gay
men. Personal narratives of displacement and cultural marginalization, such
as those written by ethnic Turks in Germany, bring stories of second-class
citizenship to the bar of public opinion around the world. Narratives of disability claim that the failure of the state to address the particular needs of the
disabled is a denial of basic human rights. Stolen Generation narratives in

03-schaffersmith

16

5/6/04

9:47 AM

Page 16

Biography 27.1 (Winter 2004)

Australia collectively reframe “well-intentioned” policies of assimilation as
forms of cultural genocide. Narratives by former “comfort women” such as
Jan Ruff-O’Herne’s 50 Years of Silence force attention on military rape cultures through which women’s rights to life and bodily integrity are violated,
bringing to the fore recognition of the importance of women’s rights and
human rights. Prison narratives of political dissidents, like the letters from
prison by China’s champion of democracy Wei Jingsheng, while often
banned in their country of origin, find publishers elsewhere, and thereby
exert continued international pressure on non-compliant nations to address,
justify, and modify their human rights record.
Sometimes narratives published previous to the public recognition of a
specific rights campaign are recirculated and resituated within the context of
that campaign, as has been the case with Sally Morgan’s My Place. Published
in the year of Australia’s bicentenary of white settlement/invasion, Morgan’s
hybrid narrative reconstructs her coming to consciousness as an Indigenous
Australian, and incorporates the oral histories of her mother, grandmother,
and uncle. Initially received as an individual journey in search of a lost identity, My Place was reinterpreted as a “stolen generation” narrative about lost
childhoods after the publication of the Bringing Them Home report (Wilson)
issued by the National Inquiry into the Separation of Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander Children from their Families (Kennedy 237). In such cases, a
narrative’s popularity, built up through years of new editions, provides a
threshold that seeds the reception of narratives by succeeding witnesses.
Sometimes published narratives serve as lightening rods in rights campaigns. Take, for example, the case of Rigoberta Menchú’s powerful testimonio, I, Rigoberta Menchú: An Indian Woman in Guatemala, published originally in Spanish in 1983 and issued in English in 1984, quickly finding a
responsive audience, particularly in the United States. “This is my testimony,” she begins: “My experience is the reality of a whole people.” Menchú’s
testimonio chronicled the means through which the ruling elites and the military sustained their power and maintained their control over the Quiché
Indian population through physical violence, economic dependency, and
cultural denigration. It chronicled as well the passionate commitment of the
indigenous community to withstand degradation and forge a politics and an
activism of resistance. Throughout her testimony, Menchú provided graphic
details of her own personal and familial tragedy at the hands of a repressive
army that tortured her mother to death, murdered her father, and burned
her brother alive. Menchú’s narrative and her extensive activism directed
world attention to the plight of the Quiché Indians in Guatemala, contributing to the efforts of Indigenous Guatemalans, united in local guerrilla

03-schaffersmith

5/6/04

9:47 AM

Page 17

Schaffer and Smith, Conjunctions

17

resistance movements, to bring an end to state-sponsored massacres and an
increased respect for Mayan culture.
Through her narrated life, Menchú told the story of her people, performatively enacting the culturally specific mode of collective testimony that
exposed the oppressive conditions within Guatemala and secured her authority to speak as a representative of her people elsewhere. The attention generated by the testimonio produced an aura-effect around Menchú herself, elevating and legitimating the Quiché woman as an international authority on
the struggles of indigenous peoples. In 1992 Menchú was awarded the Nobel
Peace Prize, international acknowledgment that brought increased sympathy
for her cause and increased interest in her narrative. She was subsequently
appointed Goodwill Ambassador for the United Nations-sponsored International Year (and now decade) of Indigenous Peoples, becoming a spokesperson for indigenous communities around the world that are engaged in local
campaigns and are claiming rights to self-determination and cultural integrity.
Taken up in the United States as testimony to human rights abuse, and
promulgated largely through the advocacy of the urban left, Menchú’s narrative became a symbol of the revolutionary spirit and struggle of a people.
It also entered mainstream academe when selected as a core text in the
undergraduate curriculum at Stanford University, and when placed on the
reading lists of courses in literary and cultural studies, Spanish languages and
literature, and anthropology at many other colleges and universities. These
modes of circulation and reception in America reified the narrative as an
exemplary testimonio. When taken up in university classrooms and scholarly
journals, the text became a locus of postcolonial critique in the United
States. It spurred debates among Latin Americanists, postcolonial critics,
anthropologists, and women’s studies and cultural studies scholars about the
nature of the postcolonial condition, the evidentiary status of testimonio, and
the intersections among cultural formations, reading publics, and politics.
The combination of popular and scholarly attention turned close attention
back on the narrative itself.
In the late 1990s, I, Rigoberta Menchú provoked a scandal in academic
and activist circles in the United States with the publication of David Stoll’s
analysis, Rigoberta Menchú and the Story of All Poor Guatemalans. Stoll, an
American anthropologist, challenged the text’s status as testimonio. While
sympathetic to the Quiché cause espoused by Menchú, he charged Menchú
with fabricating details of her own history, of the violent oppression of her
family, of the deaths of family members, and of the extent of her leadership
role in the resistance.11 His critique fuelled yet another set of contestations.
Among other issues, commentators questioned the nature of the collaborative

03-schaffersmith

18

5/6/04

9:47 AM

Page 18

Biography 27.1 (Winter 2004)

relationship between Menchú and Elisabeth Burgos-Debray, the anthropologist/collaborator who is sometimes listed as the “author” of the text.
Debray’s role as interlocutor and editor of the text called into question the
“authenticity” of Menchú’s narrative as witness documentary. Readers, critics, and activists took sides. Menchú’s cause was joined. In fiercely contested debates, advocates and detractors invoked Menchú’s narrative in newspaper columns, academic journal articles, and conference sessions in the
United States, where they took up issues having to do with personal and collective forms of remembering, narrative authenticity, and juridical versus
non-juridical understandings of truth telling.
The circulation and reception of Menchú’s narrative demonstrates the
contested and unpredictable impact such stories can have. In some contexts,
as Attwood and Magowan suggest, published stories can become a form of
cultural and political capital for oppositional groups (xi), and the knowledge
they represent can generate proprietary claims within communities that distinguish insiders from outsiders. In others, readers and audiences can impose
competing demands and tools of interpretation through what Leigh Gilmore
terms “extrajudicial ‘trials’” or “forums of judgment” that provoke engagements around the evidentiary status of narrative meanings. Through these
contradictory channels of circulation and reception a “levering forward of
ethics, truth telling, and scandal” unfolds, setting in motion many potential
outcomes (Gilmore, “Jurisdictions” 695–96).
The history of reception of I, Rigoberta Menchú suggests that those who
publish their stories of oppression, abuse, trauma, degradation, and loss can
neither know nor control how that story will be received and interpreted. A
story can generate recognition, empathy, critical awareness, advocacy, and
activism elsewhere that helps to empower people struggling locally in
Guatemala to extend their campaigns for human rights. The same story can
become a commodity, and the teller a celebrity on a world stage, as the narrative is dispersed through book clubs, radio and television interviews and
talk shows, classrooms and living rooms, picked up by independent documentary filmmakers, and distributed internationally. The same story can
become a “scandal” overseas that produces resistance within and beyond the
boundaries of Guatemala as it generates, as did I, Rigoberta Menchú, controversy that turns international attention to claims and counterclaims having
to do with issues of juridical veracity.
Through the rise in publication of “minority” life stories, the literature
of trauma, and hybrid forms of life writing, storytelling has become a potent
and yet highly problematic form of cultural production, critical to the international order of human rights and movements on behalf of social change.

03-schaffersmith

5/6/04

9:47 AM

Page 19

Schaffer and Smith, Conjunctions

19

Personal narratives in all their generic variety and locational specificity reveal
the effects of the traumatic past whether the past be one of radical dislocation, “terrorism,” physical torture, profound loss, forced assimilation, discrimination, oppression, or sexual abuse. The very aesthetics of form, the
very forms of narrative address to the reader, enable victims to speak truth to
power. As meta-sites for social critique, published narratives sometimes
unsettle received conceptions of personal and national identity, sometimes
dismantle the foundational fictions through which nations and imagined
communities construct and reconstruct their histories, sometimes promote
new platforms for and forms of political action, and sometimes produce a
backlash of actions that forestall recognition and redress. In local communities and through global flows, stories sometimes enable the re-constitution of
lost subjectivities, call forth new narratives of affiliation and belonging, and
open up new international debates on the practical means through which to
achieve justice with respect for the historical, national, religious, and philosophic traditions both consonant with and different from those foundational to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
At other times, however, their efficacy remains severely limited. The personal voice, as it is picked up, edited, translated, published, and disseminated by dispersed media, institutions, and advocacy groups around the world
becomes at once reified as the authentic voice of suffering and depersonalized through various forms of recontextualization. The narrative reaches
broader audiences beyond the local community, but those audiences subject
the narrative to different and unpredictable readings, put the narrative to different and unpredictable uses. At any historical moment, only certain stories
are tellable and intelligible to a broader audience. Ultimately, historical contingencies also bring historical occlusions.
OTHER SITES OF NARRATION

Published life narratives, although widely circulated and influential, are only
one site of personal storytelling in the field of human rights. Storytelling in
the context of human rights takes place in diverse venues and occurs for a
variety of intentions. Sometimes it occurs in the field, where abuses are
ongoing, or in preparation for a commission hearing or national inquiry. In
these instances the taking of testimony is purposeful and directed at a particular goal or specific aspect of a human rights campaign. Sometimes the narrating is embedded in UN-sponsored documents and NGO handbooks and
Internet sites, or framed by the UN-sponsored aims and objectives of national forums and reports. At others, it is gathered into anthologies of testimony

03-schaffersmith

20

5/6/04

9:47 AM

Page 20

Biography 27.1 (Winter 2004)

assembled by activists, academics, and publishers. Sometimes stories are produced by local campaigners and circulated through dispersed media. At
other times the aims and objectives of personal storytelling are more diffuse,
as in the many scattered sites of rights activism, and in mediascapes where
reporting on rights and rights advocacy is advanced. Some sites are organized
and supported by human rights institutions. Some operate underground in
opposition to state laws, constantly subjected to surveillance, censorship, and
possible prosecution. Other venues of public culture—sporting events or
rock concerts for example—may seem entirely unrelated to human rights
activism but can suddenly be mobilized to call attention to rights violations.
CONCLUSION

Our survey of the role of storytelling in human rights campaigns throughout
the world in the late twentieth century highlights some of the many conundrums that unsettle the utopian, and modernist, ideals promulgated by the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights. The last fifty years of human rights
activism underscores the importance of storytelling in bringing the specificities of local conditions of abuse and the inadequacy of the modernist framing of rights to the attention of a global community, however compromised
those stories become when subjected to the unpredictable transits of reception between local and global locations. Claims on behalf of new and specialist rights challenge the universalist assumptions of the UDHR, presaging
new human rights agendas. These agendas prompt diverse platforms for
advocacy, especially as they respond to the cultural contingencies of minority cultures and indigenous groups or to the concerns of activists in Asian
and Islamic countries. They prompt calls for new approaches to justice
(Douzanis 368–69). They also prompt new modes of witness.
New rights agendas, challenging the authority of Enlightenment-based
principles, now circulate in a global environment radically altered by the
September 11, 2001, terrorist attack on the United States. A new regime, that
of the global “war on terror,” seems to be displacing the regime of human
rights, sidelining certain principles of justice and reorienting the politics of
alliance and responsibility along the way. These changes have prompted
some commentators to suggest that we are now witnessing the demise of an
era of human rights and commitment to social justice. Nonetheless, the
international market for local stories has not diminished, nor have the capacities of readers to respond ethically to the violations inflicted upon others,
nor the commitments of human rights campaigners to pursue channels of
redress. While there appears to be an erosion of human rights principles and

03-schaffersmith

5/6/04

9:47 AM

Page 21

Schaffer and Smith, Conjunctions

21

mechanisms and a loss of moral authority for the international, national, and
local institutions charged with promoting justice, there remain in place a
multitude of witnesses, activisms, alliances, and challenges, seeding new definitions of rights and new human rights campaigns. Thus, despite the challenges to the philosophies and politics attached to the international regime
of human rights, calls for justice, dignity, and freedom continue to engage
listeners and call readers to respond ethically by joining the cause of disempowered and disenfranchised people in many parts of the globe. As balancing acts, directed back to a past that must be shared and toward a future that
must be built collectively, acts of personal narrating remain foundational to
the expansion and proliferation of claims on behalf of human dignity, freedom, and justice.
NOTES
AUTHORS’ NOTE:

1.

2.

3.

This article forms part of the discussion taken up in our forthcoming book
Human Rights and Narrated Lives: The Ethics of Recognition (Palgrave, in press).
The West is obviously a contested concept. By it, we mean to imply not a geographic
location but a locus of symbolic and grounded power relations, emanating mainly from
the United States, Europe, and the English-speaking world, sharing Enlightenment
traditions and (post)colonial histories. The term entails a complex and often contradictory set of philosophic, political, economic, and social relations. There is no ground
for identifying an essential “Western” subject, discourse, or nation. The Western subject shares many attributes of modern, or modernizing, subjects, nations, and cultures
across the globe. Often, critics in non-Western countries who are contesting Western
frameworks use hybridized Western-based political, legal, and cultural theory to make
their case. Often those living in and identifying with the West inflect their arguments
with theories and analyses contrary to Western traditions. We will try to work with
some of these complications in our analyses of storytelling in a human rights field.
As Leigh Gilmore recently noted, the number of books published in English and
labeled as “autobiography or memoir” tripled from the 1940s to 1990s (Limits 1). Gilmore goes on to discuss factors contributing to the memoir boom, particularly in the
United States. Jay Winter notes that in the last twenty years historians in France, Germany, Italy, and Portugal have sought and published numerous collections of memoirs
as ways of understanding historical legacies of events in the twentieth century (52).
The Sisters in Islam is a case in point. Working in Malaysia, but connected to reformist
Islamic women’s groups throughout the world, Sisters in Islam solicits testimony from
abused Muslim women with a view to promoting equality and justice in accord with
the teaching of the Koran. Although the group adopts modernist philosophies and feminist practices from the West that are “not welcomed” by conservatives and traditionalists (Langlois 60), it has nonetheless been influential in a number of spheres, particularly in relation to law reform and advocacy for Islamic women suffering domestic
violence. Working between democratic states rights and religious obligations of the

03-schaffersmith

22

5/6/04

9:47 AM

Page 22

Biography 27.1 (Winter 2004)

Islamic state, Sisters in Islam argues that grounds can be found in the Koran to promote
equality, justice, and freedom for women through democratic Shari’a (or religious) law
reform.
4. Elie Wiesel and Primo Levi were two of the more widely circulated witnesses from the
1960s and 1970s, contributing their testimony to public Holocaust remembrance.
5. Hirsch defines postmemory as “the relationship of children of survivors of cultural or
collective trauma to the experiences of their parents, experiences that they ‘remember’
only as stories and images with which they grew up, but that are so powerful, so monumental, as to constitute memories in their own right” (8).
6. Films include documentaries like Claude Lanzmann’s Shoah, and features such as
Steven Spielberg’s Schindler’s List. Representative exhibitions and archives include the
Spielberg Shoah Visual History Foundation, the Fortunoff Video Archive at Yale University, and the dramatic scenes of witness in the Holocaust Museum in Washington,
D.C.
7. The reception of Holocaust narratives by different audiences both inside and outside
of Israel suggests how critical location is to reception. In Israel, the dominant mode of
response is to receive these narratives as examples of heroic resistance and survival. In
the United States, Holocaust literature is consumed and interpreted within national
narratives of redemption, as stories that tell “of the wider struggle for tolerance, for freedom of religion, for freedom from persecution: they locate the Holocaust within the
American narrative, itself configured as universal” (Winter 54).
8. See, for example, Caruth; Felman and Laub; and La Capra, among others.
9. For some social commentators, however, “the global reach of the media and of power
mechanisms with which they are in complicity dwarf local efforts to fight back” (see
Massumi 30).
10. Dunant shared the first Nobel Peace Prize (1901) with Frédéric Passy.
11. See The Rigoberta Menchú Controversy, edited by Arturo Arias; with a response by
David Stoll.
WORKS CITED

Altbach, Philip G. “Publishing in the Third World: Issues and Trends for the 21st Century.” Publishing and Development in the Third World. Ed. Altbach. London, Melbourne,
Munich, and New York: Hans Zell, 1992. 1–28.
Arendt, Hannah. Eichmann in Jerusalem: A Report on the Banality of Evil. London: Faber &
Faber, 1963.
Arias, Arturo, ed. The Rigoberta Menchú Controversy; with a Response by David Stoll. Minneapolis: U of Minnesota P, 2001.
Attwood, Bain, and Fiona Magowan. “Introduction.” Telling Stories. Indigenous History and
Memory in Australia and New Zealand. Ed. Attwood and Magowan. Sydney: Allen &
Unwin, 2001. xi–xvii.
Ball, Karyn. “Trauma and Its Institutional Destinies.” Cultural Critique 46 (Fall 2000):
1–44.

03-schaffersmith

5/6/04

9:47 AM

Page 23

Schaffer and Smith, Conjunctions

23

Baucom, Ian. “Globalit, Inc.; or, the Cultural Logic of Global Literary Studies.” PMLA
116.1 (Jan. 2001): 158–72.
Baxi, Upendra. “Human Rights: Suffering between Movements and Markets.” Global Social
Movements. Ed. Robin Cohen and Shirin M. Rai. London: Athlone, 2000. 33–45.
Bennett, Jill, and Rosanne Kennedy, eds. Introduction. World Memory: Personal Trajectories
in Global Time. London: Palgrave, 2003. 1–15.
Berlant, Lauren. “The Subject of True Feeling: Pain, Privacy, and Politics.” Cultural Pluralism, Identity Politics, and the Law. Ed. Austin Sarat and Thomas R. Kearns. Ann
Arbor: U of Michigan P, 1999. 49–84.
Boler, Megan. “The Risks of Empathy: Interrogating Multiculturalism’s Gaze.” Cultural
Studies 11.2 (Mar. 1997): 253–73.
Breines, Paul. Tough Jews: Political Fantasies and the Moral Dilemma of American Jewry. New
York: Basic Books, 1990.
Caruth, Cathy. Trauma: Explorations in Memory. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins UP, 1995.
Clarke, David. “Contemporary Asian Art and Its Western Reception.” Third Text 16.3 (Fall
2002): 237–42.
Douzinas, Costas. The End of Human Rights: Critical Legal Thought at the Turn of the Century. Oxford: Hart, 2000.
Dunant, Henry. A Memory of Solferino. Washington, D.C.: American National Red Cross,
1939.
Farrell, Kirby. Post-Traumatic Culture: Injury and Interpretation in the Nineties. Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins UP, 1998.
Felman, Shoshana, and Dori Laub. Testimony: Crises of Witnessing in Literature, Psychoanalysis, and History. New York: Routledge, 1992.
Gilmore, Leigh. “Jurisdictions: I, Rigoberta Menchú, The Kiss, and Scandalous Self-Representation in the Age of Memoir and Trauma.” Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and
Society 28.2 (Winter 2003): 695–718.
———. The Limits of Autobiography: Trauma and Testimony. Ithaca: Cornell UP, 2001.
Harcourt, Wendy. “Women and the Politics of Place: An Introduction.” Paper written for
the Society of International Development Research Project. <http://www.eurofem.net/
info/Politics/hrm#_Toc519568180>.
Hirsch, Marianne. “Projected Memory: Holocaust Photographs in Personal and Public
Fantasy.” Acts of Memory: Cultural Recall in the Present. Ed. Mieke Bal, Leo Spitzer and
Jonathan V. Crewe. Hanover: Dartmouth College/UP of New England, 1999.
Huyssen, Andreas. “Trauma and Memory: A New Imaginary of Temporality.” Bennett and
Kennedy 16–29.
Iman, David Bowie, and Peter H. Beard. I Am Iman. New York: Universe Books, 2001.
Kennedy, Rosanne. “The Narrator as Witness: Testimony, Trauma and Narrative Form in
My Place.” Meridian 16.2 (1997).
LaCapra, Dominick. Writing History, Writing Trauma. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins UP, 2001.
Langlois, Anthony J. The Politics of Justice and Human Rights: Southeast Asia and Universalist Theory. Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 2001.

03-schaffersmith

24

5/6/04

9:47 AM

Page 24

Biography 27.1 (Winter 2004)

Levi, Primo. If This Is a Man. New York: Orion, 1960.
Massumi, Brian. “Everywhere You Want to Be: Introduction to Fear.” The Politics of Everyday Fear. Ed. Massumi. Minneapolis: U of Minnesota P, 1993. 3–38.
Maupin, Armistead. Tales of the City. New York: Harper & Row, 1978.
McCourt, Frank. Angela’s Ashes: A Memoir. New York: Scribner, 1996.
———. ’Tis: A Memoir. New York: Scribner, 1999.
Menchú, Rigoberta, with Elisabeth Burgos-Debray. I, Rigoberta Menchú: An Indian Woman
in Guatemala. Trans. Ann Wright. London: Verso, 1984. Trans. of Me Llamo Rigoberta Menchú Y Asi Me Neció La Consienca. Barcelona: Editorial Argos Vergara, 1983.
Morgan, Sally. My Place. Fremantle: Fremantle Arts Centre Press, 1987.
Rall, Ann. “Trauma and the Myth of the Superwoman: Gender, Class and Counseling in
Post-War Rwanda.” Institute for Research on Women and Gender. University of
Michigan, 2003.
Rieff, David. A Bed for the Night: Humanitarianism in Crisis. New York: Simon and Schuster, 2002.
Ruff-O’Hearn, Jan. 50 Years of Silence: Comfort Women of Indonesia. Singapore: Toppan,
1996.
Stoll, David. Rigoberta Menchú and the Story of All Poor Guatemalans. Boulder: Westview,
1998.
Stratton, Jon. “Before Holocaust Memory: Making Sense of Trauma between Postmemory
and Cultural Memory.” Unpublished paper, 2003.
Wajnryb, Ruth. “The Holocaust as Unspeakable: Public Ritual Versus Private Hell.” Journal
of Intercultural Studies 20.1 (Apr. 1999): 81–93.
Wei Jingsheng, ed. The Courage to Stand Alone: Letters from Prison and Other Writings. New
York: Viking, 1997.
Whitlock, Gillian. The Intimate Empire: Reading Women’s Autobiography. London: Cassell,
2000.
Wiesel, Elie. “A Tribute to Human Rights.” The Universal Declaration of Human Rights:
Fifty Years and Beyond. Ed. Yael Danieli, Elsa Stamatopoulou, and Clarence J Dias.
Amityville, NY: Baywood, 1999. 3.
Wilson, Sir Ronald, ed. Bringing Them Home: National Inquiry into the Separation of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Children from Their Families. Canberra: Human
Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission, 1997.
Winter, Jay. “The Memoir Boom in Contemporary Historical Studies.” Raritan 21.1 (Summer 2001): 52–66.

