Copyright 1998. State University of New York Press.
All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.

EBSCO Publishing : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM
via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES
AN: 7921 ; Kuribayashi, Tomoko, Tharp, Julie Ann.; Creating Safe Space :
Violence and Women's Writing
Account: undeloan.main.ehost

Page iii

Creating Safe Space
Violence And Women's Writing
Edited By
TOMOKO KURIBAYASHI
and JULIE THARP
STATE UNIVERSITY OF NEW YORK PRESS

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page iv

Published by
State University of New York Press, Albany
© 1998 State University of New York
All rights reserved
Printed in the United States of America
Cover art: "A Safe Place" by Barbara Harman. Used by permission of the artist.
No part of this book may be used or reproduced in any manner whatsoever without written permission. No part of this book may be stored in a retrieval system or
transmitted in any form or by any means including electronic, electrostatic, magnetic tape, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise without the prior
permission in writing of the publisher.
For information, address the State University of New York Press,
State University Plaza, Albany, NY 12246
Production by Diane Ganeles
Marketing by Nancy Farrell
Library of Congress Cataloging­in­Publication Data
Creating safe space: violence and women's writing / edited by Tomoko
Kuribayashi and Julie Tharp.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references (p. ) and index.
ISBN 0­7914­3563­6 (alk. paper). — ISBN 0­7914­3564­4 (pbk. :
alk. paper)
1. American literature—Women authors—History and criticism.
2. English literature—Women authors—History and criticism.
3. Women and literature—United States. 4. Women and literature—
Great Britain. 5. Child abuse in literature. 6. Sex crimes in
literature. 7. Feminism and literature. 8. Violence in literature.
9. Women—Crimes against. 10. Incest in literature.
I. Kuribayashi, Tomoko. II. Tharp, Julie Ann.
PS147.C74 1997
810.9'9287—dc21
97­1723
CIP
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page v

CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION

1

THEORIZING OUR LIVES

9

I Stand Here Naked, and Best Dressed in Theory:
Feminist Re­fashionings of Academic Discourse
Brenda Daly

11

The Solace of Separation:
Feminist Theory, Autobiography, Edith Wharton, and Me
Susan L. Woods

27

Fighting Back on Paper and in Real Life:
Sexual Abuse Narratives and the Creation of Safe Space
Sonia C. Apgar

47

SURVIVING

59

Incest and Rage in Charlotte Brontë's Novelettes
Susan Anne Carlson

61

Safe Space or Danger Zone?:
Incest and the Paradox of Writing in Woolf's Life
Diana L. Swanson

79

"One Need not be a Chamber—to be Haunted":
Emily Dickinson's Haunted Space
Mary Jo Dondlinger

101

"There is no home there": Re(his)tor(iciz)ing Captivity and the Other in Spofford's
"Circumstance"
Lisa Logan

117

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page vi

"Entirely Unprotected": Rebecca Ketcham's Trail Diary
Mary Sylwester

131

Safe Space and Storytelling: Willa Cather's Shadows on the Rock
Linda K. Karell

147

THRIVING

163

The Chicana Girl Writes Her Way In and Out: Space and Bilingualism in Sandra
Cisneros' The House on Mango Street
Tomoko Kuribayashi

165

Abuse and Its Pleasures: Compensatory Fantasy in the Popular Fiction of Anne
Rice
Annalee Newitz

179

On Blues, Autobiography, and Performative Utterance: The Jouissance of
Alberta Hunter
Kari J. Winter

201

"In the Center of My Body is a Rift": Trauma and Recovery in Joy Kogawa's
Obasan and Itsuka
Julie Tharp

213

CONTRIBUTORS

227

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY

231

AUTHOR INDEX

233

SUBJECT INDEX

237

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 1

INTRODUCTION
This collection of articles has grown out of a rather simple, though earnest, interest in writings by women—many of them unknown to the reading public—who have
experienced degrees of sexual abuse, most typically incest. Voices in the Night, edited by Toni McNaron and Yarrow Morgan, and I Never Told Anyone, edited by
Ellen Bass and Louise Thornton, came out almost simultaneously in the early 1980s as a result of writing workshops organized by and for women survivors of
childhood sexual abuse. The editors of both volumes point to the therapeutic benefits of writing about one's experience of childhood sexual abuse as an indispensable
step towards genuine healing. In their introduction, McNaron and Morgan emphasize "the necessity and excitement of rendering women's lives into art as healing,
enriching and affirmative experiences," since "otherwise this huge reality for one­third of all women will be romanticized or buried or trivialized or mocked" (17–18).
Bass and Thornton define their goal in putting their book together thus: "to help give the sexually abused child a voice. She had been studied, evaluated, reevaluated,
and compiled into numerous statistics and case studies. But had this child ever spoken for herself?" (17). Supporting these beliefs, psychologist Judith Herman in her
1991 book, Trauma and Recovery, recognized the importance of "reconstructing the trauma story" as one of the major stages of the healing for survivors of traumatic
experiences since ''when the truth is finally recognized, survivors can begin their recovery" (3,1).
Herman defines the first stage of recovery in the context of counseling as that of "establishing safety" and the second stage as that of "reconstructing the trauma
story" (3). But the process of writing about violence as described by McNaron and Morgan and by Bass and Thornton seems to indicate that creation of safe space
occurs simultaneously as the telling/writing of the story. When women write about their experiences of violence, then, safe space is not a prerequisite, but something
that comes out of the writing process.
Our 1993 Midwest Modern Language Association Meeting session titled "Women's Writing As Creation of Safe Space" was a rather casual offshoot of such
knowledge and exploration as these books made possible of the relationship between women's sense of safety and their writing. We simply wanted to gather papers
that would illustrate ways in which survivors of sexual violence

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 2

used their writing to create a safe space from which to speak, in order then to create more safe space, perhaps to be shared with others. This seemed to be by itself a
worthwhile cause to base our session on, as we daily faced reports of various sorts of violence against women and our own increasing sense of personal danger.
The paper abstracts we received in response to our one­page call for papers in the spring of 1993, however, opened our eyes to larger possibilities. The scholars who
wrote to us addressed the issues of childhood sexual abuse, ensuing trauma, and survivors' efforts to overcome the sense of imminent danger through writing. They
also proposed to examine other related topics such as social violence against women, emotional abuse, definition of audience for and by survivor discourse, as well as
linguistic and literary problems surrounding women's writing about experiences of violence. The session, which eventually became a double session, far outreached our
initial expectations, growing into a multifaceted colloquium, with presentations including various eras—seventeenth to twentieth centuries—and various nationalities—
American, British, Canadian, and German.
The range and number of paper topics proposed for our session only reminded us of the prevalence of violence against women in many societies, past and present. If
one needs any "academic" and "professional" evidence—as if news reports are not depressing and convincing enough, or because they are too sensational to warrant
level­headed contemplation—a number of recent publications provide proof of the widespread violence and demonstrate how such violence is condoned or even
encouraged by the cultures and societies in which we live.
In It Could Happen to Anyone: Why Battered Women Stay, Ola W. Barnett and Alyce D. LaViolette quote statistics from the late 1980s that say "approximately
20%–50% of all female emergency patients (not just trauma victims) are battered women" and "women make 1,453,437 medical visits per year for treatment of
injuries resulting from an assault by a spouse" (xvii–xviii). According to Ann Jones in Next Time She'll Be Dead: Battering and How to Stop It, all the attention paid
by media and legal efforts made in the recent years have not helped to decrease domestic violence. ''A few years ago the FBI reported that in the United States a man
beats a woman every eighteen seconds. ... Now [i.e., in 1992] it's twelve" (6, author's italics). The most reliable count, the number of homicides resulting from
domestic violence against women, says that such violence is on the increase: "In Massachusetts, in 1989, one woman was slain by her husband or boyfriend every
twenty­two days...in 1992 it is happening every nine days" (Jones 7).
In Transforming a Rape Culture, edited by Emilie Buchwald, Pamela Fletcher, and Martha Roth, the preamble defines "a rape culture," which is the culture in which
we live, as follows:

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 3
What is a Rape Culture? It is a complex of beliefs that encourages male sexual aggression and supports violence against women. It is a society where violence is seen as sexy and
sexuality as violent. In a rape culture women perceive a continuum of threatened violence that ranges from sexual remarks to sexual touching to rape itself. A rape culture
condones physical and emotional terrorism against women as the norm. (vii, authors' italics)

Ellen Bass corroborates that "we live in a society where men are encouraged to do violence to women and children, subtly and overtly" (25). According to McNaron
and Morgan,
approximately one out of every three girl children experiences sexual abuse in her family, and with figures that approximately 97% of all victims of sexual abuse are girls and not
boys, we begin to place incest within the context of a sexist culture. Anything that happens to one out of every three girls is neither random nor exceptional. (14–15)

In an interview with Ms., Ann Jones links domestic violence against women to the popular concept of romance and love: "The problem is that so much of men's
controlling behavior is absolutely synonomous with what is described as signs of love in the 'true luv' [i.e., romantic myth widely circulated through popular literature
and media] kinds of literature" (60). In Interrogating Incest, Vikki Bell also suggests that "normal sexuality, normal power relations and the normal family are
implicated in incestuous abuse. The men who are known to have abused children are not perverted, but 'normal,' everyday men" because so much of the sociocultural
norm of male sexuality is linked to aggression, domination, and violence (82). In the face of such cultural and societal assumptions (however hidden) that women are to
be controlled by men even (or especially) with the use of violence, women do write both creatively and theoretically to have their voices heard and to create safe
space.
Relevant to such societal acceptance and encouragement of violence against women, one crucial question emerged as we organized our session on women writing to
create space: Can acts of writing—and their products—be dangerous for women who write to overcome their experiences of violence and ensuing trauma?
Historically, writing has been both a means of empowerment and a source of anxiety for women. Feminist scholars of earlier women writers agree that women writers
had more obstacles to overcome before they could write than their male counterparts. Some scholars believe that it was a path of thorns even for more successful
women writers. Scholars of eighteenth­ and nineteenth­century British women writers, for example, assert that women who attempted to write did suffer considerably
from the incompatibility between

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 4

the contemporary definitions of the nature of writing and the socio­cultural ideals of femininity of their time. Writing was an act of self­assertion, a characteristic alien to
behavior expected of women, especially well­bred ones. In The Madwoman in the Attic, Sandra Gillbert and Susan Gubar argue that creation of literary texts was
considered an exclusively male domain from which women were biologically barred; it was believed that "because they are by definition male activities ... writing,
reading, and thinking are not only alien but also inimical to 'female' characteristics" (8). Consequently, "those women who were among the first of their sex to attempt
the pen were evidently infected or sickened by just the feelings of self­doubt, inadequacy, and inferiority that their education in 'femininity' almost seems to have been
designed to induce" (59–60). Elaine Showalter, in A Literature of Their Own: British Women Novelists from Brontë to Lessing, concurs that ''early women
writers' relationship to their professional role was uneasy. Eighteenth­century women novelists exploited a stereotype of helpless femininity to win chivalrous protection
from male reviewers and to minimize their unwomanly self­assertion" (17).
Other scholars emphasize the happier examples while acknowledging the difficulties women writers faced. In Literary Women, Ellen Moers discusses how Elizabeth
Barrett (Browning) and George Sand "made those difficulties [that plague women's lives] into resources" (5). According to Moers, Barrett (as well as Sand) had it all:
"She [Barrett] wanted fame: published in her teens and twenties, her poetry was hailed round the world, and she was nominated for the laureateship. She wanted a
share in the normal masculine literary life, and ... she saw that life come to her. ... She wanted love as well. ... She wanted more love; and it came, it came—" (7).
We probably should not forget either that for many a woman such as Harriet Beecher Stowe, writing was one of the few options, if not the only one, for earning a
wage large enough to support herself or her family. These women wrote mainly or partly out of an economic necessity, rather than—or not only—out of a desire or a
need for artistic self­expression. In such cases, writing as a means of economic independence, even with its own drawbacks, must have been empowering to the
women themselves.
Today's scholars of women's writing echo the scholars cited above when considering women's relationship to the printed word, sometimes choosing to magnify only
one of the two potentials of writing: the danger or the empowerment. Bass and Thornton optimistically observe that in their book "women ... have tranformed
themselves, like phoenixes rising from the ashes, through their own words" and that "in this book, survivors of childhood abuse use the power of speech to transform,
to fuse secret shame, pain, and anger into a sharp, useful tool, common as a kitchen knife, for cutting away lies and deception like rotten fruits, leaving the clean hard
pit, that kernel of truth" about incest (22,59). In contrast, McNaron and Morgan hesitate to celebrate the coming of their book unquestioningly:

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 5
Often we wept deeply, not from content, but from uttering the taboo words in a safe, supportive environment. To write those same stories as narrative is a second and huge step
because we put form around what has seemed so chaotic, we make public to strangers the most intimate truths about ourselves. We also give up control because we cannot know
how a given reader will respond to us. (19)

Herman also recognizes the danger of self­exposure: "Those who attempt to describe the atrocities that they have witnessed also risk their own credibility. To speak
publicly about one's knowledge of atrocities is to invite the stigma that attaches to victims" (2). As Thornton argues, many children do not speak up about their abuse
because they believe that their "word alone will very likely not be honored" (18). A woman/child can be labeled liar when speaking the truth, and thus have that
calumny of dishonesty piled on the previous pain and trauma.
In this volume, a number of articles address the question of the danger of speaking up. Diana Swanson considers Woolf's ambivalent relationship to a medium that
both sustains her and renders her terribly vulnerable. Brenda Daly and Susan L. Woods both discuss the particular vulnerability academics open themselves up to
when they write autobiographically. All three articles purport to discover why, if writing is risky, women still continue to try to write. Sonia Apgar's article details the
recovery process undergone by women writing about past trauma. Other answers to the question are proposed by nearly all of the essays in the collection, most being
psychological, but some even economic.
This question later grew into another, yet more complex one. Are women co­opted into the oppressors' group when they write their way into the mainstream, by
accepting and even using the power dynamics that oppressed them in the first place? While this question lurks behind many of the essays, Annalee Newitz discusses it
more directly in her consideration of the incest and pornography in Anne Rice's enormously popular fiction.
The concept of safe—or unsafe—home is inseparable from the act of writing for the purpose of creating safe space, because the home is a central spatial element to
many women's lives and also because much of the violence women experience takes place in their home, belying the social myth that the home is safe space for all
residents. Home is supposed to be, but often is not, safe for women, as is attested by the number of women battered at home and children sexually and otherwise
abused by their family members. Mary Jo Dondlinger argues that a number of Emily Dickinson's poems can be read as symptomatic of just such a homelife. In some
cases the family home or private acts of writing such as journaling may appear safe, but in fact are not. Certainly Dickinson is very protective of her writing, even within
her home. Could the appearance of safety be a reflection of the deceptiveness of society's paternalistic

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 6

attitude towards women? Are victims of incest in some ways privileged in their comprehension of this?
When the home itself is threatened or transplanted, a new set of problems arise, as we discover in Lisa Logan's discussion of Harriet Spofford's fictive captivity
narrative. The American frontier was a difficult place to maintain any sense of safety whether at home or abroad. Mary Sylwester's analysis of Rebecca Ketcham's trail
diary reveals a woman desperately seeking a sense of home and security on the westward trail. One solution to the dangers of home suggested by Willa Cather is
seclusion in a convent, a space which Linda Karell examines.
Another important question is this: Is writing—language—as dangerous to women as many homes are, or is there a kind of writing that is particularly safe? For
example, does so­called women's language, valued and sought by feminist writers like Luce Irigaray, provide a safer medium for women writing about their
experiences of violence? How much safer are journaling and more private types of publishing, such as magazines like Ms. that are geared towards a self­identified
feminist audience or small circulation journals? Don't these publications also have their own codes of acceptability so that some writers may get censored and/or
criticized when they have expected more sympathetic reception? If writing—language—and publishing have long been male­dominated and any changes that women
may make are still only grafted onto the cultural base that condones or supports violence against women, could women ever find or create a safe home by writing at
all?
From the anthologized articles focusing on nineteenth­century and early twentieth­century writing, it would seem that women have attempted many different strategies
of voicing their experiences—encoding, symbolism, allegory, plot machinations—in ways that also protect them from discovery by all but the most sensitive or
informed reader. The very secretive nature of much of women's early writing suggests a knowledge of its power and danger. Susan Anne Carlson explains how
Charlotte Brontë's novelettes were originally written in script so small they require a magnifying glass to read.
More fundamental questions arise concerning the body—more specifically, the female body—space and writing and their interconnections. What kind of space can
possibly be created by writing, and what is the process by which one creates it? Tomoko Kuribayashi proposes that Sandra Cisneros creates safe space through
bilingualism, creates a house where neither the poverty and sexism of her Chicano home nor the violence and racism of the Anglophone world can hurt her. How does
writing also relate to the body, when the wish to have a safe haven for their bodies is one of the reasons these women are writing? All of the twentieth­century authors
under consideration in this anthology address these concerns, although perhaps none so felicitously as Alberta Hunter who, according to Kari Winter, wrote blues
lyrics as a playful language of the body which in fact protected Hunter's lesbian identity. Unlike Hunter, Joy Kogawa,

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 7

according to Julie Tharp, connects the sexual trauma of her young protagonist to racial/ethnic oppression, in this case the oppression of Japanese Canadians during
World War II. For both authors, however, a reclamation of the body's integrity is central to their writing.
Recently the newspapers have been flooded by reports on trials in which a parent previously accused of incest sues his/her child—and often the child's psychologist—
for false charges and is granted monetary and other compensations. What alleged victims of abuse say or write is cast into dubious light by mass media. Articles and
books published on the subject of false memory syndrome, such as Michael D. Yapko's Suggestions of Abuse: True and False Memories of Childhood Sexual
Traumas and Mark Pendergrast's Victims of Memory: Incest Accusations and Shattered Lives, do address important issues that are potentially beneficial to
authentic survivors of abuse. Retractors' newsletters and associations for parents falsely accused of sexually abusing their children do provide valuable help. The same
can be said for books like Wounded Innocents: The Real Victims of the War Against Child Abuse, by Richard Wexler. But these can also lead to the assumption
that what women—or children—say about their experiences of violence should always be taken with a large pinch of salt, if not downright suspected as false or
exaggerated. Twenty years ago, women speaking out about the abuse they suffered were already not believed. According to Ann Jones,
Once feminists encouraged battered women to 'speak out' and tell their stories, as women in the antirape movement had done, the circumstances of the battered woman and of the
rape survivor proved remarkably alike. Both were doubted and disbelieved, both were charged with making false accusations, both were blamed for provoking violence, both were
said secretly to enjoy it, both were blamed for not preventing it themselves, both were shamed into silence. (8)

While the current atmosphere, created by the backlash against women working to stop violence against women, would seem to be a dangerous one in which to bring
forth a book of this nature, the work done here provides needed affirmation of the efforts undertaken by women to survive and recover from genuine trauma.
The essays in this volume are arranged so as first to introduce the reader to theoretical frameworks that may help her better understand the following sections. The
second section contains essays about nineteenth­century and early twentieth­century writers, and the third section focuses on mid to late twentieth­century writers. The
essays also happen to share thematic and rhetorical similarities, however, in that the earlier writing frequently reveals a survival mentality in which women write of these
matters only at great risk

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 8

to themselves; and the later literature reveals women writing from a more secure place certainly but still with the problems and ambivalence expressed by their
foremothers.
Such is the range of issues addressed by the essays included in this anthology. Together the essays question, and explore, what safe space for women is, how women
define and try to create it through writing, and how it can be dangerous to women writing at all. Which may, or may not, lead to creation of safe space within this
volume.

Bibliography
Barnett, Ola W., and Alyce D. LaViolette. It Could Happen to Anyone: Why Battered Women Stay. Newbury, CA: Sage Publications, 1993.
Bass, Ellen, and Louise Thornton, eds. I Never Told Anyone. New York: HarperCollins Publishers, 1983.
Bell, Vikki. Interrogating Incest: Feminism, Foucault and the Law. New York: Routledge, 1993.
Buchwald, Emilie, Pamela Fletcher, and Martha Roth, eds. Transforming a Rape Culture. Minneapolis, MN: Milkweed Editions, 1993.
Gilbert, Sandra, and Susan Gubar. The Madwoman in the Attic: The Woman Writer and the Nineteenth­Century Literary Imagination. New Haven: Yale
University Press, 1979.
Herman, Judith Lewis. Trauma and Recovery. New York: Basic Books, 1992.
Jones, Ann. Next Time She'll Be Dead: Battering and How to Stop It. Boston: Beacon Press, 1994.
Jones, Ann. "Where Do We Go From Here?" Ms. 5.2 (September/October 1994): 56–63.
McNaron, Toni, and Yarrow Morgan, eds. Voices in the Night. Pittsburgh and San Francisco: Cleis Press, 1982.
Moers, Ellen. Literary Women. 1976; New York: Oxford University Press, 1985.
Pendergrast, Mark. Victims of Memory: Incest Accusations and Shattered Lives. Hinesburg, VT: Upper Access, Inc., 1995.
Showalter, Elaine. A Literature of Their Own: British Women Novelists from Brontë to Lessing. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1977.
Wexler, Richard. Wounded Innocents: The Real Victims of the War Against Child Abuse. Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1990.
Yapko, Michael D. Suggestions of Abuse: True and False Memories of Childhood Sexual Trauma. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1994.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 9

THEORIZING OUR LIVES
Over the last two and a half decades, women in western and non­western societies have started to vocalize the aspects of their lives that had long been ignored,
devalued, or misrepresented by mainstream discourses. This newly claimed area of public discourse has included women's experiences of sexual violence, a powerful
tool by which women had long been silenced and "kept in place" in patriarchal societies. Women's accounts of sexual violence have also brought to light other kinds of
violence, exposing a societal system, previously invisible, of brutalization, intimidation, and oppression. In telling their individual stories of sexual violence from the
survivor's perspective, women have also found validation of their experiences and viewpoints, which has led to their liberation from the sense of shame that sexual
violation often evokes in the survivor. Women narrators have, however, encountered hostile and damaging criticism from those who do not grant credibility to their
accounts.
Academic feminist discourse, which has grown out of the same need and desire for affirmation and freedom as these life­stories have, not only has prompted and
eased the birthing of women's first­person narratives, but also illuminates ways in which women can use their stories to empower themselves and those they wish to
protect. For example, feminist theory can help give credence both to the women narrators themselves and to their potential audience. Feminist theory can also identify
an audience that will be receptive or affirming instead of doubtful or condemning. In turn, these women writers have nourished academic feminist discourse, by
providing the evidence of women's reality to generate and validate theory. The relationship between feminist academic discourse and women's accounts of their
experiences is that of mutual understanding and nurturing. One cannot exist without the other.
The following section contains three essays which illuminate such crossroads of women's stories and feminist theory, one on the benefits and dangers of writing
autobiographical academic articles; one which demonstrates how autobiography and theory can flow in and out of each other in one narrative; and one which
theorizes, from a psychoanalytic and linguistic point of view, on the process of empowerment in contemporary women's writings about sexual violence. All three
essays offer frameworks, at once autobiographical and theoretical, from which to better understand women's accounts—both contemporary and of earlier eras—of
their experiences of violence.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 11

I Stand Here Naked, and Best Dressed in Theory: On Feminist Re­fashionings of Academic Discourse
Brenda Daly
Is academic writing a "safe space" in which to tell personal stories? For a well­established, tenured professor, the answer may be "yes," but for women students,
especially those who want to tell stories of sexual trauma, the answer, though still "yes," comes with this qualification: those who have such secrets to tell should reveal
them, at least initially, only to those who will bear witness to their suffering. Despite this cautionary note, I know how liberating it can be for a survivor to bring the issue
of sexual abuse into the academy, especially when she claims the right to theorize her own experience. Nevertheless, since writing that synthesizes the autobiographical
and the theoretical violates the conventions of academic writing, it can be risky. Hence, the ambivalence of my metaphors: shall I stand here naked in autobiography,
or shall I clothe myself in theory? Yes, it is possible to protect one's self with layers of theoretical clothes, to establish authority and distance through formal apparel,
but it is also possible to shed too many layers of clothing, to become overly personal, to lose one's authority through intimacy. Therefore, this paper asks the following
pedagogical questions: 1) how do feminists establish a new dress code when, in fact, we are actively engaged in transgressing the conventions of academic attire? And
2) how do feminist teachers establish ground rules for students who wish to attempt this synthesis of genres? I open with a discussion of anxieties that surfaced as I
began writing autobiographical academic essays; then, with insights gleaned from my experiences, I turn to the issue of establishing guidelines for a pedagogy of the
personal.
During the 1980s, my feminist teachers at the University of Minnesota, Shirley Nelson Garner, Toni McNaron, and Madelon Sprengnether, provided assignments and
occasions for integrating autobiography and literary criticism. During this period, however, I would disclose my personal trauma only in private and only in the
company of trusted friends. Even though traumatic childhood experiences had determined the topic of my dissertation, I didn't

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 12

think it wise—given the intense competition for tenure­line positions—to risk writing an autobiographical dissertation. Nevertheless, while in graduate school, I did
transform one formal academic paper, initially written for a linguistics course, into an essay about my mother's "feminine" speech. Later published in a feminist journal
with the title, "I VIVIDLY REMEMBER, pretty well: A Witness Against Her Self," this essay dramatizes my ambivalence toward my mother's feminine helplessness,
as well as ambivalence about violating the academic taboo against any use of the personal. Although it felt liberating to integrate linguistic theory and feminist insights, in
retrospect, I view this piece as a betrayal of my mother's trust. Even though she gave her permission to use the trial transcript of her testimony on the witness stand, I
didn't show her the essay because, I rationalized, I didn't want to hurt her feelings. 1 As this example illustrates, self­revelation can be risky, not only for the writer, but
for those written about. Teachers should remember this.
Only after completing my degree did I finally write a fully self­disclosing autobiographical­academic essay. In "My Friend, Joyce Carol Oates," first presented at the
University of Minnesota's Center for Advanced Feminist Studies, I briefly mention that I had chosen to write a dissertation on Oates because of her ability—though
she did not know me—to authentically portray my personal pain, the pain of an incest survivor. I recognize, in retrospect, that I was using this autobiographical essay
to build a life raft of words that would enable me to survive the ego­crushing rejections that occur during a job search. During this search, the family secret I had
carried all my life exacerbated my sense of inadequacy, but I had finally found a safe feminist place in which to break my silence. Yet, it was one thing to present the
paper before a visibly friendly audience, quite another to publish it for an invisible audience which would, in all likelihood, refuse to believe me. After all, even Freud
had determined that when "hysterics" accuse their fathers of violating them sexually, they are lying. Primarily because of my concern with audience, I revised "My
Friend, Joyce Carol Oates" a number of times before it appeared in a collection called The Intimate Critique. I was, I confess, relieved that the collection was not
published until after I was tenured, for I was once again concerned about audience: not only about those in my English department who would review my work, but
also about scientists on the college committee who would be even less likely to value autobiographical writing. The pedagogical point here is that teachers should be
aware that, depending upon the audience and the timing, survivors of sexual trauma may actually be traumatized again if required to write autobiographically.
I expected, after achieving tenure, to feel less anxiety about writing autobiographical criticism. To test this newfound sense of security, I responded to a call for
autobiographical­criticism by writers from a variety of disciplines for a collection called Nexus. This time, in an essay called "My Father/My

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 13

Censor: English Education, Politics, and Status," I decided to confront directly my ancient (and perhaps exaggerated) fear of being punished for truth­telling. To my
surprise, the old ambivalence returned with a vengeance: yes, I felt my "soul at the white heat" while writing the essay, but I also felt threatened by the real possibility of
negative consequences. This time it would not be my father who would punish me (in fact, my father is dead) but THE FATHERS. "The fathers," as I have internalized
them, are the powerful men, the Wizards of Oz, who run institutions. These fathers always privilege "masculine" theory over "feminine" pedagogy; they assume that
professors are always smarter than high school teachers; and they create and enforce the professional conditions that require others, who also want professional status,
to conform to their views. More specifically, since ''My Father/My Censor" analyzes how institutional hierarchies affect my current teaching position, I still anticipate
anger from some members of my own English department. But I have grown tired of splitting myself into two separate curriculum vitae—one featuring literature, the
other English education—depending upon the academic positions of my anticipated audience. This strategy has been necessary because elitist members of this
profession regard my background in high school teaching as automatically disqualifying me to teach or write about literature. This snobbishness, practiced by some but
not all English professors, still makes me angry.
Fortunately, I liberated myself from this debilitating anger during the process of writing "My Father/My Censor." Writing this essay also enabled me to recognize a
recurring theme in all of my autobiographical­critical essays: the importance of reading in my life. Even during my adolescence, when I was unable to stop my father's
abuse, reading helped me to keep alive some faith in my ability to act and think independently. Later, inspired to read women writers by the women's movement, I
discovered a community of women writers and characters who could understand and even sympathize with my point of view. Moreover, many women in this
community had suffered abuse—sometimes even sexual abuse—but they had survived and, in some cases, had managed to become authors. I decided, therefore, to
examine the effects of my language arts education on my ability to author my own life and writing. This project was a way of joining with feminists engaged in the
collective struggle to revise a sexist and racist language arts curriculum. To research this autobiographical­theoretical study, which I call Authoring a Life, I visited
English classrooms, from grade school to graduate school, where I was once a student or teacher. In particular, I asked what changes, if any, had been made in
language arts classrooms since the women's movement. Were women writers now being taught in high school English classrooms and, if so, what difference did this
change make in the lives of women students?
What I have learned is that high school students continue to read few, if any, works by women. If we accept the testimony of many feminists, that

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 14

women read novels and autobiographies to learn how to plot their lives, then the traditional language arts curriculum, still firmly in place in most high schools, continues
to deny young women opportunities to imagine and analyze their narrative options. Traditional plots are inequitable, as Joanne Frye points out: "The paradigmatic plots
based in the qualities of strength, autonomy, and aspiration seem reserved for male protagonists; the paradigmatic plots based specifically in female experience seem to
confine women in domesticity and apparent passivitity" (1). To counter the gender constraints of traditional plots, I recommend teaching fiction that re­visions old
plots—fiction that Gayle Green defines as meta­fiction. By comparing plots and counterplots, students of both genders will learn a wider range of narrative options. It
is also possible that such activities—activities that invite students to engage in re­visionary reading and writing—will prompt more women to actively theorize their own
experience, rather than leaving this important task to others. Regardless of race, as bell hooks argues, women must resist the impulse to leave the theorizing to white
men, for theories which have not been tested by the experiences and insights of women can, of course, be used to oppress them. In short, I believe that despite
conflict and tension, a new synthesis of the theoretical and the autobiographical is emerging in academic writing. It is now possible to be both "naked" and "dressed" in
the same essay. And despite the risks, young women and men should be encouraged to participate in this life­altering form of writing.
My own work is a good example of the synthesis of autobiography and theory, but feminists, beginning with the poet­critics, have practiced this synthesis for some
time. Adrienne Rich and Susan Griffin are two of the earliest and best known examples; more recently, Lynne Z. Bloom, Diane Freedman, Jane Gallop, bell hooks,
Nancy K. Miller, Sharon O'Brien, Jane Tompkins and others have synthesized autobiography and theory. Nevertheless, despite numerous models of successful
autobiographical writing by feminists, my doubts and anxieties continue to surface as I write autobiographical criticism. One reason for my insecurity is that the
synthesis of autobiography and theory varies greatly—ranging from Jane Gallop's confessions of uncertainty while reading Lacan to the situational dynamics of
television talk shows that often deny the power of theoretical analysis, or expertise, to survivors of sexual violence. 2 At least for a feminist audience, Gallop's
revelation of uncertainty makes her authorial stance seem less godlike and more appealing; by contrast, revelations of uncertainty by an unknown incest survivor may
automatically disqualify her as an expert on the topic. The status of the speaker, and the context in which she speaks, make all the difference. As a survivor of father­
daughter incest, I know how vulnerable one can feel when acknowledging such a history; at the same time, I believe it is terribly important for survivors to claim the
right to theorize and thereby change a culture in which such

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 15

violence occurs. Linda Alcoff and Laura Gray address this very problem in an article called "Survivor Discourse: Transgression or Recuperation?"
Alcoff and Gray use a synthesis of autobiography (they briefly acknowledge the fact that they have been victims of sexual violence) and theory (Foucault corrected by
feminist insights) to analyze the problem of confessional modes of discourse. They are most concerned with those confessional discourses that involve sexuality—
including rape, incest, and sexual assault. After analyzing a variety of discourse situations, including television talk shows, they conclude:
Our analysis suggests that the formulation of the primary political tactic for survivors should not be a simple incitement to speak out, as this formulation leaves unanalyzed the
conditions of speaking and thus makes us too vulnerable to recuperative discursive arrangements. Before we speak we need to look at where the incitement to speak originates,
what relations of power and domination may exist between those who incite and those who are asked to speak, as well as to whom the disclosure is directed. (284)

Alcoff and Gray argue that in their "struggle to maintain autonomy over the conditions of our speaking out if we are to develop its subversive potential" (284), survivors
must claim the right of "obstructing the ability of 'experts' to 'police our statements,' to put us in a defensive posture, or to determine the focus and framework of our
discourse" (284). This analysis by Alcoff and Gray, as well as the work of bell hooks, has helped me to articulate why it is imperative that trauma survivors maintain
authority over their own confessional discourse. The question is, if students are assigned autobiographical writing, can they maintain authority over their own discourse,
even in a feminist classroom?
As I know from experience, even when the occasion to speak out is provided by feminists, it is difficult for a survivor to strike the balance of self­disclosure and self­
censorship, or between autobiography and theory. For example, when I sent "My Father/ My Censor" to Diane Freedman, co­editor of the Nexus collection, she
asked me to revise, omitting some textual references and providing more autobiography. Initially, because this request made me feel as if I were being asked to take
off more clothing, I struggled to determine whether, by complying, I would be giving up authority over my own discourse. I finally recognized that Freedman's editorial
recommendations would actually improve my essay, for in this case I was trying to hide behind theoretical/textual analysis. It was a strategy for armoring myself against
the vulnerability I felt when writing in the confessional mode. As I wrestled with this issue, I determined that for me to speak with authority requires that I speak
clothed in theory, whereas to speak strictly autobiographically means to

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 16

stand naked, defenseless, exposed. This conflict—a conflict with myself, not with Freedman—forced me to acknowledge that I sometimes use theory as armor to
protect myself and/or my audience from the embarrassment of emotion. The confessional mode (And why should I confess? Am I guilty of something?) prompts my
fear of loss of control, or loss of authority; however, a synthesis of confessional and theoretical modes stimulates a different kind of fear: the fear of rejection.
I worry, for example, about rejection from feminist friends who have criticized the use of the personal in academic essays, describing it as self­indulgent or
exhibitionistic 3 or simply irrelevant. Daphne Patai says, for example, "I doubt that I am the only one who is weary of the nouveau solipsism—all this breast­beating,
grandstanding, and plain old egocentricity. Where does it all leave us?" (53). She replies that autobiographical writing leaves us "with nothing more than a shared
awareness that scholarly works do not descend from heaven, but are written by human beings" (53). Perhaps Patai is right. If I write an essay about the sexual abuse
of children, what difference does it make that I, like many women, actually experienced such abuse? In fact, for some readers, personal revelation would only weaken
my argument against male violence since, presumably, I lack the objectivity of a detached observer. At the same time, I also consider possibility of rejection by
feminists who resist theory, as for example, Nina Baym does in "The Madwoman and Her Languages: Why I Don't Do Feminist Theory," or by feminists who
embrace theory, as, for example, Laurie Finke does in "The Rhetoric of Marginality: Why I Do Feminist Theory." Controversy, especially among feminists, threatens
my need for affiliation. Even fictional depictions of conflict between women—such as Joyce Carol Oates's Solstice or Margaret Atwood's Cat's Eye—are painful for
me to read. In other words, I am concerned about a possible loss of authority when I write autobiographically—because most women need more authority, not less—
but I am even more concerned about a possible loss of affiliation. If women start airing their emotional differences in public, will anger drive us apart?
If what many of us seek is more a sense of community than of prestige, then this societally conditioned fear of conflict must be confronted again and again.
Unfortunately, as Lyn Mikel Brown and Carol Gilligan demonstrate in Meeting at the Crossroads, adult women actually teach girls to avoid open conflict—with the
result that by the age of thirteen many young women have lost their voices and their self­confidence as knowers. All of these concerns make me wonder whether, as a
teacher, I should provide occasions for students to write autobiographically. Yet when I introduce theory, whether to undergraduate or graduate students, they almost
always write more effectively when allowed to test new ideas against their own experiences, as well as the experiences of their peers. Therefore, I will describe the
virtues and risks of some

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 17

of my autobiographical writing assignments, beginning with a discussion of undergraduates and concluding with a discussion of a graduate student who has,
courageously, chosen to write an autobiographical thesis.
One argument for encouraging undergraduates to write autobiographically is that, in the process of synthesizing the personal and the theoretical, they internalize new
concepts more readily, integrating them more fully and criticizing them with more authority. Peter Elbow makes a related point in "Reflections on Academic Discourse:
How It Relates to Freshmen and Colleagues" when he argues that "the use of academic discourse often masks a lack of genuine understanding" and may allow
students to "distance or insulate themselves from experiencing or really internalizing the concepts they are allegedly learning" (137). I see such masking of genuine
understanding, as well as distancing and insulating, in the writing of those students who have taken our newly required undergraduate theory course. Suddenly, many of
these students seem to lose the capacity to write honestly. When this dysfunction occurs, I encourage students to write autobiographical essays about theory. For
example, after introducing reader­response theory in a senior seminar on the canon debate, I asked students to write about the place of reading in their lives,
suggesting that they reveal or conceal as much as they chose. (Women, I have noted, tend to be more self­revealing than men.) I recommended that, in these
narratives about their lives as readers, they reflect upon why and how they read in order to prepare themselves for raising questions about the assumptions, stated or
unstated, in assigned theoretical essays.
To further stimulate self­analysis and theory building, I then ask students to exchange and compare their reading autobiographies. What similarities and differences do
they see? Are these differences based upon gender, race, religion, age, geography, or generation? This assignment moves students from response to analysis, usually
enhancing their ability to read the assigned theoretical essays more critically. As Elbow says, "Often the best test of whether a student understands something is if she
can translate it out of the discourse of the textbook and the discipline into everyday, experiential, anecdotal terms" (137). Elbow cites other authorities who advocate
the integration of formal concepts with everyday experience: "Vogotsky, when he describes the need for what he calls 'scientific' or 'formal' concepts to become
intertwined in the child's mind with 'everyday' or experienced concepts; Bakhtin, when he explores the process by which people transform 'the externally authoritative
word' into the 'internally persuasive word'" (137). It is my hope that, after taking my courses, students will feel competent to read theorists and critics, not
submissively, but critically. However, assignments requiring students to integrate the theoretical and the personal must be carefully designed and monitored.
Such assignments must be especially well designed and carefully monitored for use in public secondary schools. As I explain to future teachers

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 18

enrolled in my undergraduate methods course, it is sometimes politically risky to ask students in middle school or high school English classes to write personal essays
or journals. Since students are often surprised to learn that the practice of assigning journals or personal narratives may anger some parents, I illustrate this point with a
copy of the Phyllis Schlafly Report which bears the front­page headline, "Parents Speak Out Against Classroom Abuse." Schlafly's article quotes from letters written
by angry parents, all of whom object to classroom discussion or writing about any "personal" topic, such as suicide, death, drugs, shoplifting, teen pregnancy, and
abortion. "Who are the Typhoid Marys," Schlafly asks, "who carry such poison into the classroom?" (1). This inflammatory question implies that knowledge of such
matters is what causes children to act them out. To counter such efforts at censorship in public classrooms, I argue, as James Moffett does, that the chief characteristic
of the censoring mind—"agnosis,'' or the desire not to know—is illustrated by Schlafly's argument, which is based upon the highly dubious notion that if young people
do not know about social ills, such as teen sex, they will escape such problems.
As Moffett demonstrates in Storm in the Mountains, the objections of some parents to the use of the "personal" by classroom teachers may lead to community
violence. Moffett reports that in Kanawha County, West Virginia in 1974, the wife of a fundamentalist minister, Mrs. Moore, objected to the state's attempt to adopt
Moffett's co­edited series of language arts textbooks, Interactions. In her objections to Interactions, Mrs. Moore explained that she followed these guidelines:
Textbooks must not intrude into the privacy of students' homes by asking personal questions about interfeelings [sic] or behavior of themselves or parents ... must recognize the
sanctity of the home and emphasize its importance as the basic unit of American society ... must not contain offensive language ... must teach the true history and heritage of the
United States ... shall teach that traditional rules of grammar are a worthwhile subject for academic pursuit and are essential for effective communication ... shall encourage loyalty
to the United States ... and emphasize the responsibilities of citizenship and the obligation to redress grievances through legal processes ... must not encourage sedition or
revolution against our government or teach or imply that an alien form of government is superior. (quoted in Moffett 23)

Mrs. Moore did not invent these guidelines; they are spelled out by Mel and Norma Gabler of Texas, who have a nationwide reputation for successful efforts to
censor textbooks. Such guidelines would have comforted my father, a member of the John Birch Society, for if textbooks or writing assignments

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 19

could not "intrude upon the privacy of the student's homes," then his nocturnal crimes would remain hidden from the scrutiny of public authorities.
Since colleges and universities are not as vulnerable to parental control as secondary schools, it might be assumed that professors need not be concerned with the risks
of assigning personal writing. However, even graduate students, when deprived of the conventional boundaries of academic discourse, need to analyze the problems of
audience they may encounter when using the personal. For example, if a student wishes to use an autobiographical essay as a writing sample for admission to graduate
school, will such an essay be appropriate for a more distant, and necessarily judgmental, reader? In other words, if someone who lacks professional status writes
autobiographically, will she lose the very audience she intends to persuade? Through discussions of actual audiences beyond my classroom, I try to prepare students
for the politics of the academy and, at the same time, give them the freedom to write, or not to write, in this hybrid genre. Recently, for example, I directed an
autobiographical­critical thesis—an analysis of Edith Wharton's The Mother's Recompense—written by a woman, who, like Wharton's protagonist, is herself the
mother of daughters. Because she is exceptionally intelligent and mature, and because she expressed an interest in doing something different in her thesis, something
more creative, I suggested that she read some models of autobiographical academic essays in The Intimate Critique. Afterward, we agreed, she could decide
whether she would like to try writing in this mode.
Although I told Sue 4 that some professors might not approve of autobiographical criticism and, as a result, she would have to choose her thesis committee with great
care, she persisted in her choice. When I pointed out, given the problem of audience, that when applying for doctoral study, she might not wish to submit an
autobiographical thesis as a writing sample, still, she persisted. In fact, I was probably more anxious than she, partly because I know how competitive it has become to
even be admitted to graduate schools in English. Although I explained how difficult it is to gain admission into graduate school and how finding a tenure­line position is
even more difficult, Sue persisted. That spring (1993), when the Women's Caucus for the Midwest Modern Language Association issued a call for papers on the topic
of the synthesis of autobiography and theory in academic writing, I suggested that Sue submit a paper on the pleasures and dangers of writing in this hybrid genre.
Presented under the title, "Wagering It All in Double Jeopardy: Autobiography in a Graduate Paper," her paper provides valuable insights, from a graduate student's
perspective, about the risks and rewards of synthesizing feminist autobiographical theories—from writings by Adrienne Rich, Jane Tompkins, Nancy Miller, Diane
Freedman, and others—with the theories of Mikhail Bakhtin.
In her autobiographical introduction to "Wagering It All in Double Jeopardy," Sue describes a conversation at a dinner party which illustrates, in

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 20

extremis, some of the audience problems she would face. After asking probing questions about her thesis, a male professor at the dinner party "picked up his fork,"
she writes, "pierced his artichoke heart, and exclaimed, 'Well! I knew, sooner or later, it would devolve to this! Now anyone's interpretation is correct. So much for
universal truth!'" (2). Undaunted by this negative response, she persisted. One reason she decided to use autobiographical criticism, she explains, is that conventional
criticism tends to "appropriate the dialogism of the novel" (4), while personal criticism, in which "the author and audience occupy the same plane ... surmounts the
distance of monological language'' (4). When Bakhtin describes such moments as "border violations" (Bakhtin 33), Sue argues, he is speaking of "border crossings"
similar to those identified by Diane Freedman in An Alchemy of Genres. To further support her synthesis of autobiography and theory, Sue calls upon bell hooks,
who argues that "feminist theorists ... need to be conscientious about not supporting monolithic notions of theory. We will need to continually assert the need for
multiple theories emerging from diverse perspectives in a variety of styles" (37).
Since I had never before invited a graduate student to participate in a conference presentation, I worried that Sue might find it threatening to present a graduate
student's perspective at a conference dominated by professors. However, once again, she demonstrated intelligence, self­confidence, and a sense of humor. Theory
should not be used as a "power over" others, she argued, but rather as a "'power of' reinforcing choice" (5). The dangers of using autobiography, as she sees them, are
both personal and political. In using autobiography, she says, "We risk our own feelings of security" (5). "Will we be understood?" she asks, "Will we embarrass
ourselves? our families? those we love?" (5). However, for graduate students the specific danger is that by "using the experiential, we all risk loss of credibility," a risk
she views as "much greater for the graduate student, a voice constantly struggling for credibility, than it is for the established writer" (5). As she points out, "Many of
the poetcritics who serve as role models for graduate­level experiential writing first established themselves through traditional theory" (5). Yet she argues that graduate
students who can depend upon "mentoring from sensitive, feminist professors" (6) should at least attempt autobiographical criticism.
However, even with such mentoring, the risk of failure is much greater when writing in this hybrid genre because, as she explains, "exposition, which calls for directness
of purpose and a straightforward thesis, often exists in conflict with narration, a style associated with slower development, an unfolding" (6). Sue found that, as a result
of this tension between the two modes, she was revising much more extensively. Of course, as her major professor, I was the person requesting these major revisions
and, though the trust between us was strong, I worried that she would misinterpret my criticisms. I addressed this concern by telling her how I, too, had struggled with
the problem of

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 21

revisions. At the same time, I recognized the validity of her cautionary remark that "the graduate student who is unfamiliar and unpracticed in combining these two
styles, because of the structure of the syllabus in a particular graduate level course, may lack the time to develop this skill" (6). Only because Sue had asked me to
direct her thesis very early in her graduate program did she have the time for such extensive revision. In fact, she took an incomplete in an independent study with me
in order to revise the paper in which she first attempted autobiographical criticism. Part of the difficulty, as I see it, is that she was learning to write in this hybrid genre
while, at the same time, she was reading the theory which enabled her to justify it. Because I had learned the theory first, it may have been easier for me to later
combine it with autobiography.
Yet, in the final analysis, Sue was excited to be engaged in feminist writing that transgressed academic conventions of the "impersonal" and the "universal." Despite the
dangers—her concern, for example, that "as I submit my work for publication and for consideration in doctoral programs, my concern is that, similar to its reception at
the dinner party, my work will be devalued based on form before the content of the work is ever considered" (6)—she persisted in writing an autobiographical thesis.
Unfortunately, the end result of Sue's experiment was mixed. Although a chapter of her thesis, ''The Solace of Separation: Feminist Theory, Autobiography, Edith
Wharton, and Me," was accepted for publication in this volume, her application for graduate study at the University of Iowa was not successful. However, she may
have been turned down, not because she wrote an autobiographical thesis, but because Iowa took so few of the students who applied: only fifteen out of
approximately six hundred. We will never know for certain how her writing sample was evaluated, nor will we know how other factors—such as where she had
earned her master's degree—entered into the decision. However, having wagered it all, she had, in a certain sense, lost.
At first, after learning that Sue had not been accepted by the University of Iowa—the only school that, due to family responsibilities, she could have attended—I felt as
if I had mentored her poorly, especially since her academic record is excellent in all respects. However, since I had warned her of possible consequences of writing
autobiographically, not once but any number of times, I finally renounced this guilt. As always, Sue accepted, without remorse or recrimination, the consequences of
her choice. Even so, despite the pleasures of mentoring a student who had the courage to write autobiographical criticism, I am not exactly eager to do so again. But
news travels fast among graduate students and, recently, a young woman who had heard about Sue's experience with the genre asked me to direct an autobiographical
thesis in which she analyzes depictions of rape in the fiction of Joyce Carol Oates. Since I had just completed a book on Oates, I should have welcomed this
opportunity and, to some degree, I did. However, I also know how emotionally exhausting it was

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 22

for me to write autobiographically about father­daughter incest in Oates's fiction, and I didn't know whether she could manage the emotional turmoil she would
undoubtedly experience during the writing process. That is why I advised her, as a therapist once advised me, "Do not write about a traumatic personal experience
such as rape unless you feel safe." However, since I am not a trained therapist, I wonder whether, as an English professor, I should be providing occasions for
therapeutic writing.
Given the current political climate, which I perceive as a period of backlash against feminist issues, I think my caution is justified. As I write, during the spring of 1994,
resistance to incest stories has intensified dramatically. At present those legal cases in which incest victims have later dropped their charges—because, they explain,
their memories have been proven unreliable—are frequently in the news. For example, on "60 Minutes" (17 April 1994), Morley Safer reported on a number of legal
suits which were dropped by patients who later acknowledged that they were not remembering the experience, but responding to suggestions by their therapists. One
month later, NBC (10 May 1994) brought us the news that Gary Romana was suing the two therapists who had assisted his daughter in remembering paternal sexual
abuse. During the same month, The New York Times Review of Books (15 May 1994) published a front­page review called, "The Monster in the Mists," with the
subtitle: ''Are long­buried memories of child abuse reliable? Three new books tackle a difficult issue" (1). Only one of the books, Lenore Terr's Unchained
Memories: True Stories of Traumatic Memories, Lost and Found, argues, though not to the complete satisfaction of the reviewer, that repressed memories of
childhood trauma may turn out to be valid. However, the April issue of NEA Today, the newsletter of the National Education Association, did publish an interview
with Dr. Brian Abbott, an expert on sexual abuse, in which the doctor recommends that school personnel respond to stories of abuse by listening to and supporting the
child. "Try not to communicate any disbelief," Abbott advised, "because what's most devastating to a child is disbelief or inaction" (13). Abbott concluded with
information that a special program, "Break the Silence: Kids Against Child Abuse," would be airing on network television in May. During this same two­month period,
the daytime soap, Days of Our Lives, was running an incest story.
Intense interest in the topic has, predictably, created resistance, not only in the media, but also in courtrooms. For example, even though Holly Romana's father was
found guilty of incest, a different jury recently awarded Mr. Romana damages when he sued his daughter's therapists for malpractice, charging them with "implanting"
memories of paternal sexual abuse in his daughter's mind. Even though Holly's therapists, as well as her mother and sisters, believe Holly, jurors felt that, because of
the methods the psychiatrist had used, they could not determine whether Holly was remembering actual experiences of child­

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 23

hood sexual abuse or fantasizing them. This method of discrediting the daughter's story has a familiar ring: almost one hundred years ago, Freud reversed his own
theory—his view that hysteria had been caused by sexual abuse—when he concluded that his female patients had fantasized, rather than actually experienced, paternal
sexual abuse. According to Judith Lewis Herman, such a pattern—a period of "active investigation" followed by a period of "oblivion" (7)—characterizes the history of
psychological investigations of trauma. "Though the field has in fact an abundant and rich tradition," she says, "it has been periodically forgotten and must be
periodically reclaimed" (7). 5
During a period of backlash, such as the present, it becomes increasingly dangerous for women to write autobiographically about experiences of sexual violence. As a
female professor in a male­controlled institution, I must recognize that I cannot protect students from the negative consequences of autobiographical academic writing.
To some extent, I occupy the place of a mother who, such as Mrs. Romana, cannot protect her daughter from the abuse—whether by doctors, lawyers, journalists, or
therapists—that sometimes follows public disclosures of rape. Even though Holly's mother believed and supported her daughter, she could not control abuses by the
legal system, which implied that Holly may have lied about the abuse, or the media, which blamed Holly for injuring the Romana family. Although Holly's mother said,
angrily, that her former husband "shouldn't receive a penny for raping his daughter" (CBS News 16 May 1994), the jury had nevertheless awarded him damages. In
addition, after this verdict was announced, a television report by CBS implied that Holly, not her father, was responsible for destroying her family. A young female
reporter asked Holly, "Do you feel sorry that you have destroyed your family?" but since this question was not addressed to Holly's father, the report left viewers with
the impression that the victim, not the perpetrator, was responsible for the family's suffering. As illustrated by the Romana case, those of us who wish to support
academic daughters who write autobiographically, especially about topics such as rape, must be aware that we cannot control the reception of student texts.
Nevertheless, I believe that feminist professors must support students who choose to speak out against their abusers while, at the same time, preparing them for
negative responses from different audiences. The greatest danger is, of course, that victims of sexual violence will be accused of lying. Such accusations, as I know
from experience, are even more damaging than the experience of sexual abuse itself. For, if a woman's reality is denied, it becomes difficult for her to assert her point
of view with self­confidence. In other words, it is not only the reality that I was sexually abused as a child, but the fact that this reality was denied by my family, as well
as by society, that for many years damaged my ability to speak or write with confidence. Fortunately, the emergence of the women's movement during my lifetime
provided me

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 24

with the healing presence of a community willing to believe my story and share my suffering. In other words, I found a safe space in the feminist community. Knowing
the importance of this space, I believe that feminist professors must resist intimidation during a hostile political climate; instead, we must heighten our resolve to bear
witness. Because the feminist professor has greater security and status than her students, she must accept responsibility for providing students with a "safe space." At
the same time, she must recognize that this "safe space" is not inviolable. I recommend, therefore, that autobiographical writing never be required in classrooms;
instead, it should be offered as an option. As I know from my own experience, such freedom of choice is essential.
Notes
1. Though not written for an academic audience, my next autobiographical essay, "Of Bread and Shadows, Beginnings," which appeared in an anthology of
Norwegian­American writings, also illustrates how dangerous autobiographical writing can be. The piece received such mixed reviews from my family—it was praised
by a sister, but condemned by an aunt who refused ever to speak to me again—that my anxieties about autobiographical writing only increased. When my aunt
committed suicide on Father's Day some years later, I realized that the family secrets only hinted at in this essay had threatened her shaky public persona. Only in
retrospect did I understand that she viewed herself as the protector of family secrets that I was threatening to reveal.
2. Linda Alcoff and Laura Gray give numerous examples of television talk shows, from "Phil Donahue" to "Sally Jessy Raphael," which deny the power of theoretical
analysis to survivors of sexual violence. Alcoff and Gray describe a formulaic pattern of presentation which opens with emotional "confessions" by survivors—"The
host of the show makes sure to ask questions that are sufficiently probing to get the survivors to cry on screen"—after which "the inevitable expert shows up; almost
invariably a white man or woman with a middle­class and professional appearance, who, with a sympathetic but dispassionate air, explains to the audience the nature,
symptoms, and possible therapies for such crimes of violence'' (277). Through the use of this pattern, "survivors are reduced to victims, represented as pathetic
objects who can only recount their experiences as if these are transparent, and who offer pitiable instantiations of the universal truth the experts reveal" (277). Their
numerous examples include: ABC's "The Home Show," co­hosted by Gary Collins and Dana Fleming, September 10, 1990; "Sally Jessy Raphael," January 21, 1991;
"Geraldo," November 14, 1989; and "Oprah Winfrey," April 14, 1988. Geraldo Rivera, whose shows "are often organized around having survivors, rather than
perpetrators explain and defend them" (277), is the worst, while Oprah Winfrey, who does not allow women "to be put in the position of having to defend the truth of
their stories or their own actions" and "does not always defer to an expert but presents herself as a survivor/expert" (278), is the best.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 25

3. For example, in a review of Harriet Lerner's The Dance of Deception, Judith S Antrobus, who describes Lerner's style as "self­confessional" because she uses
"examples from her own experience," says, "I suppose she does this to make you feel at home; the implication is that she knows how you feel because she's been
there. ... Yet I felt manipulated by Lerner's confessional style. What begins as a confession often ends up as self­congratulation" (28). Antrobus objects whether
Lerner attributes her success "to luck'' or describes it as "fame and glory" (28). To ascribe her success to luck is "a typical female disclaimer," according to Antrobus,
while calling it fame and glory "seems overinflated ... and belies her stated modesty" (28). At least by Antrobus, Lerner is damned if she's modest and damned if she's
immodest.
4. Susan L. Woods has given me permission to use her name and cite her unpublished paper.
5. What is the reason for such "episodic amnesia" in the history of the study of trauma? Neither changes in fashion nor loss of interest can account for such a pattern,
according to Herman; the answer is that traumatic events force bystanders to take sides. As Herman points out, "It is very tempting to take the side of the perpetrator.
All the perpetrator asks is that the bystander do nothing. ... The victim, on the contrary, asks the bystander to share the burden of pain. The victim demands action,
engagement, and remembering" (7).
Works Cited
Alcoff, Linda, and Laura Gray. "Survivor Discourse: Transgression or Recuperation." Signs 18.2 (Winter 1993): 260–90.
Antrobus, Judith S. "In Praise of Honesty." The Women's Review of Books XI.2 (November 1993): 28–9.
Bakhtin, Mikhail M. The Dialogic Imagination. Austin: University of Texas Press, 1981.
Baym, Nina. "The Madwoman and Her Languages: Why I Don't Do Feminist Literary Theory." Tulsa Studies in Women's Literature 3.1/2 (Spring/Fall 1984): 45–
59.
Bloom, Lynn Z. "Teaching College English as a Woman." College English 54.7 (Fall 1992): 818–25.
Brown, Lyn Mikel, and Carol Gilligan. Meeting at the Crossroads: Women's Psychology and Girls' Development. New York: Ballantine Books, 1992.
Daly, Brenda. "'I VIVIDLY REMEMBER, pretty well': A Witness Against Her Self." Hurricane Alice 1.2 (Fall/Winter 1983): 1–4.
Daly, Brenda. "My Father, My Censor." Nexus. Eds. Diane Freedman and Olivia Frey. Under consideration by a university press.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 26

Daly, Brenda. "My Friend Joyce Carol Oates." The Intimate Critique. Eds. Diane Freedman, Olivia Frey, and Frances Murphy Zauhar. Chapel Hill, NC: Duke
University Press, 1992. 163–73.
Daly, Brenda. "Of Bread and Shadows, Beginnings." There Lies a Fair Land: An Anthology of Norwegian­American Writings. Ed. John Solensten. St. Paul,
MN: New Rivers Press, 1985. 146–53.
Elbow, Peter. "Reflections on Academic Discourse: How It Relates to Freshmen and Colleagues." College English 53.2 (February 1991): 135–55.
Finke, Laurie. "The Rhetoric of Marginality: Why I Do Feminist Theory." Tulsa Studies in Women's Literature 5.2 (Fall 1986): 251–72.
Freedman, Diane. An Alchemy of Genres. Charlottesville, VA: University Press of Virginia, 1992.
Frye, Joanne. Living Stories, Telling Lives: Women and the Novel in Contemporary Experience. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press, 1986.
Gallop, Jane. Reading Lacan. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1985.
Greene, Gayle. Changing the Story: Feminist Fiction and the Tradition. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1991.
Herman, Judith Lewis. Trauma and Recovery. New York: Basic Books, 1992.
hooks, bell. Talking Back: Thinking Feminist, Thinking Black. Boston, MA: South End Press, 1989.
Miller, Nancy K. Getting Personal: Feminist Occasions and Other Autobiographical Acts. New York: Routledge University Press, 1991.
Moffett, James. Storm in the Mountains: A Case Study of Censorship, Conflict, and Consciousness. Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press, 1988.
Patai, Daphne. "Point of View." The Chronicle of Higher Education 51.25 (February 23 1994):A52.
Schlafly, Phyllis. "Parents Speak Out Against Classroom Abuse." Phyllis Schlafly Report 18.1 (June 1985). Alton, IL: Eagle Trust Fund.
Terr, Lenore. Unchained Memories: True Stories of Traumatic Memories, Lost and Found. New York: Basic Books, 1994.
Tompkins, Jane. "Me and My Shadow." New Literary History 19 (1987): 169–78.
Woods, Sue. "Wagering It All in Double Jeopardy: Autobiography in a Graduate Paper." Presented at the Midwest Modern Language Association, 5 November
1993, Minneapolis, MN.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 27

The Solace of Separation: Feminist Theory, Autobiography, Edith Wharton, and Me
Susan L. Woods
The lives and experiences of women are filled with empty spaces, and the writings by and about women reflect them. Recently, feminist critics such as Nancy
Chodorow, Dorothy Dinnerstein, and Marianne Hirsch have enlightened us by reexamining and redefining these spaces. But what are the spaces, the gaps, in women's
lives and women's writing, that these feminist critics have identified? Just as every woman is unique, the void and unvoiced in each woman's life will also be different.
For me they include the ignored maternal subjective, the complexities of the mother­daughter relationship, and the survivor's perspective of the incestuous experience.
Significantly, I choose to compensate for the cultural spaces inherent in my gender socialization through the control of my physical space. I find this need to control
physical space a common theme in the lives and writings of women. For example, the riveting scene for me in Edith Wharton's The Mother's Recompense is the
moment when Kate Clephane discovers her daughter and her former lover locked in a passionate embrace. This scene resonates with the silent and silenced subjects
of women's lives: incest, the maternal subjective, and spatial definition and control.
—the orgasmic, incestuous moment ...
The young man's arms were around [Anne], her cheek was against his. ... [Kate] felt the same embrace, felt the very texture of her lover's cheek against her own,
burned with the heat of his palm as it clasped [her daughter's] chin to press her closer. (221)
—the complexities of the maternal subjective ...
A dark fermentation boiled up into her brain; every thought and feeling was clogged with thick entangling memories ... Jealous? Was she jealous of her daughter?
(221)

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 28

—the female need to control/define their space. ...
She must put the world between them—the whole width of the world was not enough. (221–22)
As I began to read the extensive literature available on the silent and silenced spaces of women's lives, I reflected on the gaps in my own life, both academic and
personal. Edith Wharton's novel The Mother's Recompense exemplifies for me the interstices of women's relationships. In this paper I will first examine M. M.
Bakhtin's theory of language in order to analyze how his concept of dialogism informs and enlightens a theoretical discussion of the maternal subjective, mother­
daughter narratives, and incest in terms of spatial metaphors as signifiers of intersubjective relationships. Through an autobiographical reading of The Mother's
Recompense, I will attempt to interpret the gendered significance of space as signified in Wharton's text and as I experience it in my life and work.
An important strategy of my academic writing has been to situate myself. After Virginia Woolf's "A Room of One's Own," I thought it important (or maybe I just liked
hearing it) to let you know I had my own space. Echoes of this situational writing can be found in the writings of other feminist critics as well. In "Me and My Shadow,"
Jane Tompkins tells us where she is—"the birds outside my window ... just myself as a person sitting here in stockinged feet, a little bit chilly because the windows are
open, and thinking about going to the bathroom. But not going yet" (169). I have now reached a point in my life, however, where it is becoming increasingly difficult to
define my space. Part of my family (a husband, two daughters, and two cats) live in Grinnell, a small town in Iowa; my son lives with his father in Bondurant, another,
smaller town; and I divide my time between Grinnell and Ames, where I am attending graduate school, picking up my son every other weekend on my drive home. In
a society where more is better, I am living a rather malformed adaptation of Woolf's dream. I not only have a room of my own, but I have acquired two homes, with
special interest in a third.
There are many adjustments to be made in such an arrangement, especially since living out of suitcases can be fragmenting. Before I continue, I should clarify that my
family has been very supportive of my efforts to complete a graduate degree and that I am fortunate in that both my "spaces" are comfortable and homey. That is not
to say that this division, this parceling of my time and space, does not have its stresses. It does. I could spend the rest of this paper discussing the guilt associated with
raising an eighteen­ and a sixteen­year­old in absentia; however, my purpose here is to discuss gaps, more specifically the gap between my family and my research,
my academic self and all those other selves I am and am not.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 29

The division I experience in my personal life, a division I have reluctantly chosen, is also present in my academic life, a division I have not questioned. My academic
writing has a particular style, a style developed as an undergraduate in the search for "the grade" and refined as a graduate student in the search for the "authoritative
voice." I was fortunate as an undergraduate to be able to enroll in creative writing courses as an outlet for my personal voice. So, while I was writing analyses of the
complexity of Portia's character in The Merchant of Venice, I was simultaneously developing the character of a child molester for one of my short stories (the
rewriting of a personal experience). Both of my voices, the academic/authoritative and the personal/experiential, had their outlet. But they were never integrated.
Although Portia and Pecola, and Touchstone and Tea Cake, intrigued me as much as the characters I imagined for my short fiction, I would not (or could not) write
about them in the same way.
The reason I am experiencing this separation of my academic and personal voice can be explained by M.M. Bakhtin's theory of language. According to Bakhtin in
The Dialogic Imagination, all languages exist as heteroglots. With this definition, the context of an utterance is given primacy over the text itself. At any given
moment, a series of conditions (social, chronological, spatial, etc.) place internal and external pressure on utterances, insuring that a word uttered in a particular place
and at a particular time will have a different meaning from the same word uttered in different places and at different times. Bakhtin calls these forces centripetal and
centrifugal because they simultaneously strive to centralize and decentralize language. The novel (and my own short stories), Bakhtin argues, is a centrifugal force while
criticism, an attempted controlling of language, is centripetal. As a result of the presence of these forces, the incongruities, spaces and gaps, of a culture's language are
illuminated. In my own life, I find myself moving between these two forces, reading the decentralized word then writing about that word in an academic, centralized
language. My language is further divided between my academic and my personal spaces.
My answer to this problem of division is to attempt what Bakhtin calls dialogism—in this instance, an attempt to fill the space between my theoretical/critical and
personal/creative voices, to write myself a new place. In dialogic language "everything means, is understood, as a part of a greater whole—there is a constant
interaction between meanings," and no one stratification of language is privileged over another (Bakhtin 426). The result of dialogism is the reflection of the
incongruities between languages. Perhaps this form of writing, then, is simply another attempt at controlling space, at creating a space of my own.
I turn my attention now to an analysis of spatial signifiers in Edith Wharton's The Mother's Recompense, specifically to the critical dissatisfaction

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 30

with the ending of the novel. While others interpret the heroine as a martyr, I read her character as a maturing woman who achieves independence through the
controlling of her personal space. I empathize with her choice to live apart from her daughter and former lover. Such empathy probably stems from the fact that I
currently choose to live apart from my family. Perhaps a dialogic discussion of the various interpretations of the novel would, as Bakhtin predicts, open up a new space
for understanding, a re­thinking of the text and a re­visioning, not only of Kate Clephane, but of all women who struggle, as I do, to move from victim to survivor. 1
Because Bakhtin's understanding of language is so closely aligned with feminist theory, as in the concepts of otherness, hierarchies, and power/victimization, the act of
placing the devalued personal voice alongside the powerful academic voice may reveal strengths in both. I intend, therefore, to discuss the struggle for voice/space in
the novel, especially as that struggle exists for women (mothers and daughters) who are incest survivors, a theme present in the novel (and most of Wharton's other
works), as well as in Wharton's and my own life. I propose that Wharton, in an attempt to imagine an alternative to the Freudian concept of the phallus, employs what
Jessica Benjamin in The Bonds of Love calls a spatial metaphor, liberating the oppressed otherness of language and gender. Wharton's heroine comes finally to exist
as Bakhtin's dialogic, free from the centrifugal forces of patriarchal language and space.
But what am I to do with those who say I cannot (must not) do this? With those who believe there is no place for the personal in academic criticism? Again,
Tompkins' essay helped me find an answer. Throughout her essay, Tompkins develops tension in the text with the interjections that she is thinking about going to the
bathroom but "not going yet." It is this tension that prompts readers like Nancy K. Miller to ask what this essay is about. "Is it about going to the bathroom? Or is it
about the conditions of critical authority? Or are they the same question?" (Miller 7). For me, this confusion about authority and bodily functions began at an early age.
I was nearly six years old when the neighbor boy told me that I couldn't go to the bathroom standing up and he could. This made no sense to me. Of course I could, if
I wanted to. And at that moment, with little Johnny staring down at me from the other side of my own teeter­totter, I really wanted to. So, I did. I jumped off the
teeter­totter, sending Johnny crashing to the ground, spread my legs and let go. Johnny told me it didn't count. I had been too messy. But I was determined that, with
practice, someday I would be as good at it as he was. Well, now Johnny owns one of the largest florist businesses in Des Moines and I search for authority in
academia instead of on the playground. (Or are they the same thing?) So, for those who would tell me I can't write in this genre and be taken seriously, my response
is, of course I can. Things may get a little messy, though—at least until I have some practice.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 31

I: A Personal Reading
Coming home is always hectic. I suffer from mothering withdrawal. Like Kate Clephane, I have this schizophrenic fear that, because of my absence, either
the family will have fallen into complete chaos or they will have gotten along just fine without me, thank you very much. I'm still not sure which would be
harder for me to accept. The sun is shining today, and the bedroom has windows on two walls which let in the pasture. It's the middle of April and too cold
to open up the house. But the sun is warm, and I fight off sleep. Wharton criticism is spread out on the peach coverlet. As I reread the ending of The
Mother's Recompense for the fourth time, I suddenly think of Grandfather.
Grandpa was a crusty old man. He married Grandma when she was sixteen. He lost his right hand in a hunting accident. He took me skeet shooting. He
was diabetic and bald. I loved him. One night my mother turned to my sister and me and told us that Grandpa was getting old. Sometimes, she explained,
old men do things they shouldn't with little girls. If Grandpa ever did anything like that with either one of us, we were to tell her. My first thought was—
How did she find out? Grandpa loved me in a special way, holding me on his lap on the front porch swing, his hand slipping under my blouse and rubbing
the training bra I was so proud of. Somehow my mother had found out, and now he was going to get into trouble. Like the heroine of the novel, I waffled
between the need for others to know and resolve this tension and my need to avoid "sterile pain." I had to be very careful. This was wrong and I couldn't
imagine what would happen if anyone found out. I had to protect Grandpa from my mother, from that all powerful mother who knew things instinctually.
But why this reading? What in the text has stirred such powerful memories? How is my response to the novel affected by personal experience? Bear with
me as I explore the questions raised by my reading of the novel, questions this paper attempts to answer. In part, I have a strong affinity with Kate
Clephane because I choose to exist separate from my daughters. I have come to realize that the process of my own individuation requires a bending, if not
breaking, of the maternal bond. Similarly, I respond strongly to the novel's incest motif. True, one could argue that the ambiguous nature of incest in the
novel hardly compares with the violation of grandfather­granddaughter incest. 2 And yet, the very violation of the limits of the incest taboo are so
overpowering that, as a survivor, incest motifs raise internalized fears of re­engulfment by the perpetrator. Therefore, in reading this novel, I find myself
pulled between insatiable desires—to either abandon or be subsumed by motherhood—to respond to incest with either the red eyes of Beatrice Cenci or the
loving eyes of Anne Clephane.
Finally, I respond strongly to the novel's resolution, to Kate's decision to return to Europe. You see, I also resolved the problem with my grandfather, but at
a great cost. Never again did I sit with Grandpa on the front porch swing. Instead, I took frequent walks to the drugstore uptown for a cherry coke and
explored the railroad tracks that ran alongside the house. In the winter, I sat in the parlor with Grandma and mother

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 32

where I learned to knit and crochet. More than once I heard Grandma comment on how ladylike I was becoming. I would never have traded my
relationship with Grandpa for my skills at needlework. But knowing Grandpa was safe, knowing I was safe, knowing my mother was safe was recompense
enough for all that separation. The crafts of women hold such sorrow for me.
II: Intervals/Interstices/Incest
(The place I am is my home in Ames. The house, which I share with an English professor, sits at the edge of a small woods; windows line the northwest wall. The
property has a steep slope down to a creek, and the windows set the living room right in the treetops. But, unlike Tompkins, I'm not faced with "a floor to ceiling
rectangle filled with green, with one red leaf" ("Me and My Shadow" 30). The winter has been unusually long. This is the last day of March, and it has been raining for
three days. The weather channel predicts snow tomorrow. But, as I sit here thinking about Edith Wharton's The Mother's Recompense, I find I'm glad that the sky is
overcast today. Maybe I feel a little like Kate Clephane. The sun would be a distraction.)
The opening of The Mother's Recompense finds Kate Clephane Distracted "by the slant of the Riviera sun across her bed" (3). Kate has taken up residence with a
band of social outcasts, a group of gamblers, alcoholics, and people, mostly women, with something to hide. Kate's secret is the abandonment of her husband and
infant daughter nearly twenty years before the start of the novel. Fleeing from what she considers an impossible situation, a controlling husband and an oppressive
Victorian society, a society that conceals, Kate leaves New York with Hylton Davies. After their short, two­year affair, Kate remains in Europe. Her attempts to re­
establish her relationship with her daughter are thwarted by her in­laws, her letters returned unopened.
Following the death of Kate's ex­husband and mother­in­law, Kate's now wealthy daughter, Anne, invites her mother to return to New York and live with her in the
family home. The reunion is everything Kate could have hoped for. She not only re­experiences the joy of her daughter, but polite New York society avoids any
reference to her sordid past. The mother­daughter reunion, however, is also complicated by many factors: living in the patriarchal house of her ex­husband, a house
that recalls many painful memories; the unforeseen independence of Anne as a result of Kate's absence during her childhood; and, most importantly, Anne's
engagement to her mother's former lover. Kate's first response to Anne's engagement is to attempt to stop the wedding, a union Kate views as incestuous. Failing this,
Kate accepts their marriage, refuses a marriage proposal of her own from the stuffy Fred Landers, and returns to the Riviera, maintaining contact with Anne and Fred
through frequent letters.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 33

It is this ending, this returning to France, that critics have made problematic for me. Unlike many who critique the novel, I find the ending satisfying, my satisfaction
rooted in the need to control my space and my identity. (I am unsure where this need comes from—the pressures of the maternal role?—the result of an incestuous
experience?) However, in his 1986 introduction to the republication of The Mother's Recompense, Louis Auchincloss finds fault with the novel's accessibility to the
reader of today:
Kate is making too much of the circumstance. Her horror approaches the horror of Oedipus when he learns that he has married his mother. Kate, like Hamlet in T.S. Eliot's essay, "is
dominated by an emotion which is inexpressible because it is in excess of the facts as they appear." (ix)

Similarly, Marianne Hirsch, in The Mother/Daughter Plot: Narrative, Psychoanalysis, Feminism, criticizes Wharton for "fail[ing] to redefine the terms of the
daughterly ... text" (121). Hirsch interprets Kate's actions as "underscor[ing] the compulsory heterosexuality and triangularity" of mother­daughter plots (121). As a
"reader of today," I dismiss Auchincloss' criticism based on the fact that I did not struggle with Kate's reaction. Although I agree with Hirsch that Wharton fails to
redefine the daughterly text, I understand Wharton to be foregrounding the maternal subjective, a move that Hirsch calls for. Cynthia Griffin Wolff believes that the
ending punishes Kate by permanently exiling her for refusing Fred Lander's marriage proposal and a return to New York society. This interpretation, however, strips
Kate of the power of choice. It is the ability finally to choose her own destiny that offers Kate, and me, comfort at the novel's conclusion.
Lev Raphael takes a different approach in Edith Wharton's Prisoners of Shame. For Raphael, Kate's actions are determined by shame, a crippling emotion that
leaves the mother with no alternatives. While Raphael does understand the ending to be a happy one, he finds little recompense of his own in that fact. "Wharton's
happy ending does little to counteract the negative arc of the book" (52). While I agree that Kate's earlier actions were motivated by shame, I believe a marriage to
Fred Landers, a man she did not truly love, to be a far more shameful choice. By contrast, my own interpretation finds a measure of agreement in Katherine Joslin's
Edith Wharton. Joslin understands the ending as I do:
Kate Clephane's 'recompense' is an understanding of her 'desolation,' her place in society as a woman outside the traditional roles. ... She is not Mrs. John Clephane nor is she Mrs.
Fred Landers; she is Kate Clephane. In her return to Europe, she reembraces her expatriate self. Wharton draws for us

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 34
a portrait, not of a young lady, but of an aging woman, who comes to recognize and accept the delicate nature of her life in middle age. (127)

I view Kate's decision to live apart from the oppressive New York society, apart from her ex­lover, even apart from her potentially controlling daughter, as
representative of her first completely independent action, her understanding of the complexity of the mother/daughter relationship, and her need to control her physical
space. Perhaps my understanding of the novel requires the reader to be "older," a reader facing the delicate nature of her own middle age. Perhaps it harkens back to
my own struggle with defining my space.
A spatial alternative, as mentioned above, to the "hegemony of the phallus as the sole embodiment of desire" is offered by Jessica Benjamin in The Bonds of Love
(86). According to the traditional Freudian proposition, femininity is defined as not masculine, by what a woman lacks—the phallus. In this interpretation of gender
identity, the penis symbolizes power and individuation, the only way to find subjectivity. However, Freud was unable to imagine an alternative female symbol of
subjectivity. The feminine, instead, is represented by sacrificial motherhood. This emphasis on motherhood as sacrificial and passive results in the female loss of
subjectivity.
While Freud failed to recognize the influence of culture on the development of gender roles, Benjamin proposes a cultural analysis of the phallus. In a society where
mothers are the primary caretakers of children, the phallus comes to represent, to both sexes, the powerful outside world as well as a weapon against the powerful,
idolized mother. Penis envy then becomes the desire of the woman to exist spatially in a public place, to be granted recognition and subjectivity. Benjamin's female
alternative to the phallus is the "intersubjective model." 3 She explains that the phallus, the "intrapsychic model," establishes difference between I and you, while the
intersubjective model establishes recognition between and within. Benjamin's model, based on mutuality and recognition, is a spatial metaphor that counters Freud's
symbol of the phallus, based on separateness and power:
The significance of the spatial metaphor for a woman is likely to be in just this discovery of her own, inner desire, without fear of impingement, intrusion, or violation. ... Certainly,
woman's desire to be known and to find her won inner [as well as public] space can be, and often is, symbolically apprehended in terms of penetration. But it can also be expressed
as the wish for an open space into which the interior self may emerge, like Venus from the sea. (128–9)

Slowly, Kate, unlike thousands of traditional male heroes, comes to recognize the otherness of her daughter and, therefore, the need of each woman to determine her
own space. Initially, the differentiation between

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 35

mother and daughter is obscured. The mother in Kate admits to the fact that she still likes being ''mothered." She envisions Anne as part of herself, "that other half of
her life, the half she had dreamed of and never lived" (60). Kate is even willing to sacrifice her own existence for her relationship with her daughter. "To see Anne living
[her life] would be almost the same as if it were her own" (60).
To be with Anne, to play the part of Anne's mother—the one part, she now saw, that fate had meant her for—that was what she wanted with all her starved and world­worn soul.
To be the background, the atmosphere, of her daughter's life; to depend on Anne, to feel that Anne depended on her; it was the one perfect companionship she had ever known.
... (emphasis mine 69)

The result of such a concept of motherhood is the denial of subjectivity, reducing Kate to a metaphysical state in which she is subsumed. When Kate finally accepts
her daughter's and her own individuality, each woman can exist outside their relationship to each other, in a separate space. Where, previously, Kate's world revolved
around the men in her life (John Clephane, Hylton Davies, Chris Fenno, Fred Landers) she now begins to desire her own place in that public world. No longer in a
psychological place where she is defined by her role as wife or mother, as Joslin says, Kate comes to live fully in her individuality.
The moment of her liberation comes when Kate recognizes and rejects the monologic language/space, with all its repressive forces, of the father/husband. This
repression is represented by the monologic language of the law and enacted through the return of Kate's letters, in which she pleads to see her daughter, by her
husband's law firm. It is this monologic language that Kate is forced to appropriate by a daughter who places her in the father's role at her wedding:
Your mother seems to think it's your uncle who ought to give you away.
Not you, mother? ...
"I want what you want." Their thin­edged smiles seemed to cross like blades. (235)

Kate's discomfort with this role—the role of the father—and the language it represents is related to her subsequent choice to live in Europe, among various peoples of
various languages, a choice exemplifying her rejection of patriarchal language. 4 Finally, in this dialogic space, Kate exists for her daughter, Fred Landers, and others,
as language, her only representation being in the form of letters. Having declared her separateness from her daughter, her former lover, her potential lover, and the
monologic language system they all employ, Kate

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 36

creates her own distinct space, her own world, and, through epistolary language, encourages others to relate to her dialogically. Unlike the monologic language of the
law, dialogic language, based on the recognition of otherness, always anticipates a response. Kate's letters, a representation of dialogism, expect and receive
responses.
The incest motif in the novel, a theme closely tied to the mother­daughter relationship, is also represented through spatial metaphor. Benjamin states that the spatial
metaphor is frequently used when women "try to attain a sense of their sexual subjectivity":
For example, a woman who was beginning to detach herself from her enthrallment to a seductive father began to dream of rooms. She began to look forward to traveling alone, to
the feeling of containment and freedom as she flew in an airplane, to being alone and anonymous in her hotel room. Here, she imagined, she would find a kind of aloneness that
would allow her to look into herself. (128)

Obviously, the attainment of sexual subjectivity is further complicated, if not completely compromised, by an incestuous experience. Here, then, is another connection
between Edith Wharton, Kate Clephane, and myself. All of us experienced the spatial violation of incest, whether actual or fantasized, and, in an attempt to "detach"
ourselves from that experience and those memories, we anticipate and enjoy our moments alone: Edith Wharton in Ste. Claire­le­Chateau, a converted monastery on
the Riviera; Kate Clephane in the Petit Palais; and me in my Grandmother's parlor, or walking uptown, or in Ames, Iowa, anywhere except the front porch swing. For
it is in these open spaces that women discover their "own, inner desire, without fear of impingement, intrusion, or violation" (Benjamin 128).
An acquaintance with a breadth of Wharton's work will most assuredly reveal the author's preoccupation with the incest theme. 5 Perhaps the most famous of
Wharton's incestuous writings is the "Beatrice Palmato" plot summary and "Unpublished Fragment. "Beatrice Palmato" outlines a story in which the father, left in charge
of his young daughter because of the mother's mental instability, educates her, during which time a deep intimacy develops. At age eighteen, the daughter marries a
man who is obviously her intellectual inferior. The father dies when Beatrice is twenty. After the birth of their own daughter, Beatrice displays an abnormal jealousy of
her husband and daughter's relationship. During a moment of epiphany, the husband comes to understand the incestuous relationship between Beatrice and her father.
The story ends with Beatrice's suicide, followed by an intimate discussion between Beatrice's husband and the brother of Mr. Palmato.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 37

Interestingly, there are several similarities between the "Beatrice Palmato" outline and Wharton's personal life. Like Beatrice, Wharton's father was instrumental in her
education. Her father not only taught her to read and introduced her to literature, but Wharton began to look on him as the source of her own literary inspiration. Her
father's library was open to her and, though her mother did not allow her the raciness of novels, she took advantage of the library's store of Elizabethan and classical
literature. Her romanticized view of the patriarchal library occasioned her to write, "Whenever I try to recall my childhood it is in my father's library that it comes to life.
I am squatting on the thick Turkey rug ... dragging out book after book in a secret ecstasy of communion... There was in me a secret retreat where I wished no one to
intrude" ("Life and I" 69–70). Wharton, like Beatrice, is twenty when her father dies. A second similarity is that both Wharton and Beatrice Palmato marry inferior
men. It is well known that Wharton's friends were surprised by her union with Teddy. After a rocky start in which consummation of the marriage was delayed for
several weeks, Edith and Teddy lived virtually celibate lives. Further, the name Beatrice Palmato is most probably an allusion to Beatrice Cenci, a sixteenth­century
Roman woman involved in a plot to murder her incestuous father. 6 Red­eyed Beatrice Cenci, in fact, makes an appearance in The Mother's Recompense in the form
of a classical portrait hanging above the double bed of Kate Clephane when she returns to New York.
While the "Beatrice Palmato" revolves around the incest theme, complicated by the similarities to both the Beatrice Cenci story and Wharton's own life, the
"Unpublished Fragment" is an explicitly erotic depiction of father­daughter incest, a depiction that portrays the daughter as fully sexualized and excited by the
culmination of father­daughter intimacy.
But she hardly heard him, for the old swooning sweetness was creeping over her. As his hand stole higher she felt the secret bud of her body swelling, yearning, quivering hotly
to burst into bloom. ... The sensation was so exquisite that she could have asked to have it indefinitely prolonged. ... (Erlich 175)

Cynthia Griffin Wolff, who first discovered the "Beatrice Palmato" and "Unpublished Fragment" at the Bernicke Library at Yale University, dates these writings at
1919–20, just prior to the publication of The Mother's Recompense. Wolff goes on to maintain that both pieces should be interpreted as fiction. It would be useless
to speculate whether or not Wharton herself was a victim of incest, an accusation that, at this point, could be neither proved nor disproved. Some critics read
Wharton's incest themes, present in not only The Mother's Recompense but a variety of Wharton novels, as a demonstration of the

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 38

author's own victimization. However, whether Wharton's incest motifs are a result of her being a victim of actual incest or of the Victorian social constraints to repress
sexuality, both her life and her work are emblazoned with what is today understood to be a pattern of behavior common to present­day incest survivors. 7
Several of the eccentricities of Wharton's life including the repression of all sexual knowledge, her subsequent sexual abstinence, and a variety of psychosomatic
illnesses can be explained by presuming the hypothesis that Edith, as a young girl, was the victim of an incestuous relationship. Wharton suffered from a pattern of
illnesses common to incest survivors: phobias, mood swings, severe reactions to temperature changes, nausea, asthma, and anorexia. Wharton writes, in 1908, to her
friend Sara Norton:
For twelve years I seldom knew what it was to be, for more than an hour or two of the twenty­four, without an intense feeling of nausea, and such unutterable fatigue that when I
got up I was always more tired than when I lay down. This form of neurasthenia consumed the best years of my youth, and left, in some sort, an irreparable shade on my life.
(Lewis 139)

Neurasthenia, a popular diagnosis for upper­class Victorian women, was thought to be the result of an overexertion of energy, perhaps brought on by the sexual
repressiveness of Victorian codes of conduct. It should be mentioned that neurasthenia was often cured by a profession. For example, Jane Addams suffered from this
disease for eight years until she founded Hull House. Whether or not Wharton's disease was the direct result of an incestuous experience, as a highly intelligent and
ambitious woman she would naturally suffer from the confusion presented by the juxtaposition of her literary self against the ideal of the refined Victorian woman.
While much of this discussion has focused on Wharton and her relationship with her father (a discussion that exemplifies Benjamin's interpretation of the phallus as
symbolic of the outside world and penis envy as the daughter's desire of a place in that world), it is important to understand the complexities of the mother's role as
well.8 Erlich addresses Wharton's complicated relationship with her mother. In her book, Erlich discusses the employment of nannies and their effects upon children in
upper class New York society. While Erlich describes in detail the animosity between Wharton and her mother, she cannot be certain of its origin:
This exaggerated sense of guilt must have derived from the idea that she deserved punishment for some injury to her mother—perhaps by regarding Nanny Doyley as her
psychological mother, perhaps by trying to become her

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 39
father's sweetheart. The denial and sacrifice of her own sexuality for so many years suggest atonement for a strong oedipal rivalry with her mother. (125)

Erlich goes on to say that the presence (intrusion) of the nanny could have resulted in an unresolved oedipal phase, "making space in the child's psyche for unusually
florid incestuous fantasies" (31). While I find theorizing about the importance and consequence of the nanny in Wharton's life fascinating, I find this type of conjecturing
no less 'reaching' than to entertain the possibility of father­daughter incest. In fact, Erlich goes on to imagine just this possibility.
Erlich raises the possibility of father­daughter incest to explain Wharton's peculiar habit as a child to "make up." Wharton wrote, in "Life and I," about her attempts to
behave as other children. Bearing the mundane play of childhood for as long as she could, Wharton would find it necessary to retire to her mother's bedroom where,
with selected books from her father's library, she would pace the floor, making up stories even before she could read.
And in another instant I would be shut up in her bedroom, & measuring the floor with rapid strides, while I poured out ... the accumulated floods of my pent­up eloquence. Oh, the
exquisite relief of those moments of escape. (12–13)

This need to have the mother witness, and perhaps resolve, the tension brought from the library strongly suggests an incestuous experience. It is also representative of
the dialogic act. For Wharton, in an attempt to liberate herself from the controlling language of patriarchy, of the father's library, enacted these scenes of "making up"
before she was able to read. She was able to juxtapose the hegemonic language of the father, represented in the books she carried, alongside the suppressed voice of
the Victorian female child. (Similarly, in an attempt to liberate myself from the controlling language of patriarchy, I juxtapose the hegemonic language of criticism
alongside the suppressed voice of personal experience.)
And so I am left with a montage, bits of Wharton's life—an intelligent, frustrated child, an erotic and aging author. I am left also with my frustration with the criticism of
the ending of The Mother's Recompense in which Kate chooses to live in a separate place from her daughter. I admire Kate's choice of the solace of separation. But
is mine a misreading? What have I missed? I gain some comfort from the fact that Wharton herself was frustrated by these same questions. Louis Auchincloss, in
Edith Wharton: A Woman in Her Time, states that, with her later fiction, critics began to write about a "drop in quality of Edith's fiction" (171). Wharton, concerned
about their remarks, responds in a letter:

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 40
Thank you ever so fondly for taking the trouble to tell me why you like my book. Your liking it would be a great joy, but to know why is a subtle consolation for densities of
incomprehension which were really beginning to discourage me. No one else has noticed "Desolation is a delicate thing" [the quotation on the title page] or understood that the
key is there. The title causes great perplexity. ... You will wonder that the priestess of the life of reason should take such things to heart, and I wonder too. I never have minded
before, but as my work reaches its close, I feel so sure that it is either nothing or far more than they know. And I wonder a little desolately which. (Lewis 483)

And so it is with my own reading. It is either nothing or far more. While others tell me I Ought to! live and read in the spaces society has assigned for me, I find solace
in the fact that separation, whether from my family or from other critics, is recompensed by the growth of reason in my own life. Up to this point, I feel neither the
desolation nor the doubt that Wharton expresses, but I anticipate that, someday, I might.
III: Interstate 80, Near Newton, Iowa: A Journey Toward the Integrated Voice
It's seventy minutes from Grinnell to Ames and I enjoy the time alone. My car is equipped with a tape deck, and I once listened to all of Winesburg, Ohio en
commute. Sometimes I tune into Rush Limbaugh. (I teach a composition class on argumentative writing and it's good for me to listen to the opposing viewpoint.) The
drive in December is especially long due to the cold weather and the early sunsets. I blame December for my passing interest in country music and the fact that I know
all the lyrics to several Randy Travis songs. The car speeds along at 68 miles per hour, and sometimes I pass Colfax or Mitchellville without even realizing it. It wasn't
always this easy. The first time I left I cried. Commuting is easier now, and, because it is, I don't get letters anymore. But, like Kate Clephane, I do miss the letters.
Being so self­sufficient is lonely.
May is a lovely month. The sogginess of spring is over. The land is drier and a deeper green. I roll the car window down an inch or two and let the wind blow on my
hair. On this particular drive I think about The Mother's Recompense and my Grandpa, about Kate Clephane and myself. I understand my reading now, my comfort
in Kate's "desolation." This is the novel as I, too, would have written it, as I did write it in my own experience with my Grandfather, as I rewrite it now in my continuing
re­examination of that and other relationships.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 41

The concept of rewriting is present in the ending of The Mother's Recompense when Kate feels as though "she had ... simply turned back a chapter, and begun again
at the top of the same dull page" (261). Aline, Kate's maid, then poses a relevant question—"What was the good of all the fuss if it was to end in this?" (261). The
good of it is not the ending. The recompense is in the writing and the rewriting of it, in the control of space and language. As Kate considers it philosophically, the good
of it is that "To begin with, it had been her own choice ... and that in itself was a help" (emphasis mine 262). Desolation by choice, a privilege not often given to the
incest victim, is a delicate thing. As delicate as the afghans and doilies in my hope chest.
The incest theme in The Mother's Recompense is, as Erlich defines it, oblique, "incest at one remove from technical actuality" (146). This helps to explain Auchincloss'
remark that "Kate is making too much of the circumstance. ... the prospect of a sexual union between Anne and Chris Fenno [is not] sufficiently revolting to cause
Kate such trauma" (ix). Yet, I realize now that the incest theme does not simply lie in the relationship of these two characters. Kate and Anne both have desires for the
other that border on the sexual. Further, the definition of the characters with whom Kate is involved is often vague—"Why, in the very act of thinking of her daughter
had she suddenly strayed away into thinking of Chris?" (73). Anne and Chris are reciprocal characters in Kate's incest motif. The story opens on Kate's anticipation of
a telegram from Chris Fenno begging her to ''Take me back" (7). A telegram does arrive with a message offering reunion; however, instead of coming from the former
lover, it comes from Anne. "I want you to come home at once"—and again—"I want you to come and live with me" (emphasis mine 10).
At the moment of reunion, Kate experiences her now adult daughter in a physical and sensual way:
She thirsted to have the girl to herself, where she could touch her hair, stroke her face, draw the gloves from her hands, kiss her over and over again, and little by little, from that
tall black­swathed figure, disengage the round child's body she had so long continued to feel against her own. (30)

Later, after Anne's engagement to Chris Fenno, Kate walks in on the two young lovers embracing each other and responds with jealousy. I would suggest Kate's
jealousy is as much for the (physical) love of her daughter as it is for her lost lover. Anne is attracted to her mother, as well. Falling easily into the role of lover, Anne
usurps the father's character by (re)giving her mother the family jewels for her coming out into New York society. With echoes of the father's manipulative love, Anne
attaches a note instructing "Darling, these belong to you. Please wear some of them tonight ..." (63).

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 42

Given the oedipal twist Wharton places on these characters, separation is the only option open to Kate Clephane, an option that Wharton also chose, and the only
option I could imagine in my own life. After Wharton's divorce, the author developed a circle of friends not unlike the outcasts Kate Clephane befriended. Among
these were Gaillard Lapsley, Howard Sturgis, Robert Norton, and Percy Lubbock. All far younger than Wharton, the group revolved around her, and she spent her
later years in Europe, fiercely independent yet flirting and being fussed over.
Perhaps Wharton, like Kate and myself, found solace in separation, in the control of her space. Kate Clephane had previously sought her identity by establishing
relationships with men (husband, lovers, boyfriend) and, thereby, with what she believed she lacked (power, penis, personhood). Through separation and the
establishment of her own space, Kate chooses to find her subjectivity not in what she lacks but, rather, in what she is. The Mother's Recompense is, perhaps, also a
rewriting of Wharton's own incestuous experience (perceived or actual), an attempt to re­imagine her family relationships. In this way, Wharton writes a story where
everyone wins. Anne gets to have the lover­father, a desire directly expressed in the "Unpublished Fragment," in Wharton's feelings for her father, and in my own love
for my Grandfather. Rewriting her life experience resolves Wharton's dilemma with incest, filling the gap between the "Beatrice Palmato" story line, the suicidal horror
of the incest victim, and the "Unpublished Fragment," "the daughter's pleasure in bringing to climax a lifetime of paternal seduction'' (Erlich 37). Kate is recompensed
by the control of her life, her space, and her language, a control that is vital to the incest survivor (I imagine her walking uptown for a cherry coke), while Anne's
recompense is the continued relationship with the incestuous parent (sitting on a front porch swing talking about skeet shooting). It also occurs to me, as I (re)write my
own incest experience, the recompense for the separation from my grandfather was my knowledge of our safety. Similarly, Kate is recompensed with the knowledge
of Anne's safety from "sterile pain."
IV: Shutting Away in a Little Space of Peace and Light is the Best Thing that had Ever Happened. ...
(The Mother's Recompense 272)
Twice during my many journeys between my two homes, my two spaces, I have been surprised. At mile marker 153 of I­80, the ditch along the south side of
the interstate slopes up, reaching toward the cornfield on the other side of the fence. The ditch is blanketed with prairie grass native to Iowa, which
revolves around the color wheel of nature's seasons. In the spring the slope is chartreuse, the color of Easter grass.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 43

By the fourth of July, it has darkened to an emerald green. August turns the ditch to a burnished red, and, by November, it is the color of wheat. The first
surprise was in December. The snow­covered slope was white but not without color for, in the middle of this grassy embankment, there stands a solitary
pine tree exquisitely shaped. It was a week before Christmas, and the tree stood fully decorated for the holiday. Complete with red and silver garlands,
ornate bulbs, and wrapped gifts nestled beneath its lowest branches, the tree rose above the traffic. There are no structures built close to this spot, no
houses or businesses, and I am convinced that the tree was decorated just for me. The hair rose on the back of my neck as I thought, perhaps, I was the
only one who saw it.
The second surprise came this spring as I first began writing this paper. Easter was a week away, and, as I drove the seventy miles between Grinnell and
Ames, I again noticed the tree. This time it was covered with brightly colored Easter eggs hanging from silver threads. Did anyone else see it? If, as I
imagine, I am the only person to notice this solitary tree growing on this strip of pasture, the surprise comes from such a private revelation in such a public
space—the same surprise I feel in the autobiographical moment of an academic essay. Therefore, if I am not completely comfortable in the restrictions of
my respective spaces and voices, I find solace in the fact that, sometimes, when travelling between them, there is joy in the open spaces of the journey.
Notes
1. I make a distinction here between dialogic and revisionary, between Bakhtin and Adrienne Rich. According to Rich, revision involves entering the text from a new
perspective with an understanding of the cultural assumptions that both inform and limit us. Bakhtin's dialogism requires entering the text in search of conflicting cultural
codes clothed in language. As a feminist, I would adopt Rich's revisionary stance in all critical reading whether or not I am employed in dialogic criticism.
2. Others, including some who have read this essay, might minimize the sexual abuse I describe by stating that my grandfather's preoccupation with my bra is innocent
of incestuous intent. In response, I use Ellen Bass and Laura Davis' definition of incest which does not require penile penetration for victimization to occur. In the
words of the authors, "the severity of abuse should not be defined in terms of male genitals. Violation is determined by [the victim's] experience as a child. ... The
precise physical acts are not always the most damaging aspects of abuse. Although forcible rape is physically excruciating to a small child, many kinds of sexual abuse
are not physically painful. They do not leave visible scars" (21).
3. Benjamin's intersubjective model is similar to Bakhtin's dialogism in that both recognize the influence of culture and depend on a recognition of other. As Benjamin
states, "intersubjective theory describes capacities that emerge in the interaction between self and others. [The self] sees its aloneness as a particular point in the
spectrum of relationships rather than as the original 'natural' state of the individual" (Bonds of Love 20).

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 44

4. An argument could be made here that Kate's associations in Europe represent the carnivalesque as defined by Bakhtin. Mrs. Plush, Mrs. Minity and Lord Charles,
because of the various roles they play and secrets they keep, are representative of Bakhtin's mask of carnival.
5. Incest motifs can be found in The House of Mirth, Hudson River Bracketed, Summer, The Gods Arrive, and The Mother's Recompense. For a full discussion
of the presence of this motif in these works see Gloria Erlich's The Sexual Education of Edith Wharton. Other critics who have also recognized and addressed this
theme include Cynthia Griffin Wolff in Feast of Words and Adeline R. Tintner in Mothers, Daughters and Incest in the Late Novels of Edith Wharton.
6. In a fascinating side note, Beatrice Cenci and Edith Wharton's mothers were both named Lucretia.
7. For a full discussion of the pattern of behavior common to present­day incest survivors, especially as it pertains to the survivors' tendency to establish controlling
relationships with men, see Ellen Bass and Laura Davis' The Courage to Heal: A Guide for Women Survivors of Child Sexual Abuse.
8. Marianne Hirsch also discusses how the maternal role in The Mother's Recompense underscores the compulsory heterosexual paradigm, in The Mother/Daughter
Plot: Narrative, Psychoanalysis, Feminism.
Works Cited
Auchincloss, Louis. Edith Wharton: A Woman in Her Time. New York: Viking Press, 1971.
Bakhtin, M.M. The Dialogic Imagination. Trans. Caryl Emerson and Michael Holquist. Austin: University of Texas Press, 1981.
Bass, Ellen, and Laura Davis. The Courage to Heal: A Guide for Women Survivors of Child Sexual Abuse. New York: Harper and Row, 1988.
Baym, Nina. "Melodramas of Beset Manhood." Feminism and American Literary History. New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press, 1992. 3–18.
Baym, Nina. "The Madwoman and Her Languages." Feminism and American Literary History. New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press, 1992. 199–213.
Benjamin, Jessica. The Bonds of Love: Psychoanalysis, Feminism, and the Problem of Domination. New York: Pantheon, 1988.
Daly, Brenda O. "I Stand Here Naked, and Best Dressed in Theory: On Feminist ReFashionings of Academic Discourse." This volume.
Daly, Brenda O., and Maureen T. Reddy, eds. Narrating Mothers: Theorizing Maternal Subjectivities. Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 1991.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 45

Duggan, Lisa. "The Social Enforcement of Heterosexuality and Lesbian Resistance in the 1920." Class, Race, and Sex: The Dynamics of Control. Eds. Amy
Swerdlow and Hanna Lessinger. Boston: G.K. Hall & Co., 1983.
Erlich, Gloria C. The Sexual Education of Edith Wharton. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1992.
Freedman, Diane P. An Alchemy of Genres: Cross­Genre Writing by American Feminist Poet Critics. Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia, 1992.
Green, Kathleen, and Laura Roskos. "Packaging the Personal: An Interview with Nancy K. Miller." Discourse: Theoretical Studies in Media and Culture 15.2
(Winter 1992–93):51–63.
Herndl, Diane Price. "The Dilemmas of a Feminine Dialogic." Feminism, Bakhtin and the Dialogic. Eds. Dale M. Bauer and Susan Jaret McKinstry. Albany:
SUNY Press, 1991. 7–24.
Hirsch, Marianne. The Mother/Daughter Plot: Narrative, Psychoanalysis, Feminism. Bloomington and Indianapolis: Indiana University Press, 1989.
hooks, bell. Talking Back: Thinking Feminist, Thinking Black. Boston: South End Press, 1989.
Joslin, Katherine. Women Writers: Edith Wharton. New York: St. Martin's Press, 1991.
Leitch, Vincent B. American Literary Criticism from the 30s to the 80s. New York: Columbia University Press, 1988.
Lewis, R.W.B., and Nancy Lewis, eds. The Letters of Edith Wharton. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1988.
Lutz, Tom. American Nervousness: An Anecdotal History. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1991.
Miller, Nancy K. Getting Personal: Feminist Occasions and Other Autobiographical Acts. New York: Routledge, 1991.
Raphael, Lev. Edith Wharton's Prisoners of Shame: A New Perspective on Her Neglected Fiction. New York: St. Martin's Press, 1991.
Rich, Adrienne. Of Woman Born: Motherhood as Experience and Institution. 10th ed. New York: W.W. Norton, 1986.
Smith­Rosenberg, Carroll. Disorderly Conduct: Visions of Gender in Victorian America. New York: Oxford University Press, 1985.
Tintner, Adeline. "Mothers, Daughters, and Incest in the Late Novels of Edith Wharton." The Lost Tradition: Mothers and Daughters in Literature. Eds. Cathy N.
Davidson and E. M. Broner. New York: Ungar, 1980. 146–156.
Tompkins, Jane. "Me and My Shadow." New Literary History 19 (Autumn 1987): 169–178.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 46

Tuttleton, James, Kristin O. Lauer, and Margaret P. Murray, eds. Edith Wharton: The Contemporary Reviews. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992.
Wharton, Edith. The Gods Arrive. New York: Appleton, 1932.
Wharton, Edith. The House of Mirth. New York: Scribner's, 1905.
Wharton, Edith. Hudson River Bracketed. New York: Appleton, 1929.
Wharton, Edith. The Mother's Recompense. (1925) New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1986.
Wharton, Edith. "Life and I." Wharton Archives, Beinecke Library, Yale University, New Haven, Conn.
Wharton, Edith. Summer. New York: Appleton, 1917.
White, Barbara A. "Neglected Areas: Wharton's Short Stories and Incest." Edith Wharton Review 8.1 (Spring 1991): 2–12.
Wolff, Cynthia Griffin. Feast of Words: The Triumph of Edith Wharton. New York: Oxford University Press, 1977.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 47

Fighting Back on Paper and in Real Life: Sexual Abuse Narratives and the Creation of Safe Space
Sonia C. Apgar
With the increased awareness of sexual abuse in the past decade has come a growing number of texts on the subject, including psychological treatises and sociological
studies, popular press and self­help books, autobiographies and anthologies of first­person narratives in which survivors tell their own stories. On a large scale, each of
these genres is both a product of (and integral to) the ongoing process of cultural work. On a smaller scale, while each personal narrative is a product of a survivor's
recovery process, the construction of these narratives is also an important part of the process itself, providing each writer with a safe space in which to both come to
terms with her experience and to (re)establish her sense of "self."
Acts of violence inflicted by one human being on another carry the inherent message that the recipient is not an equal, not worthy of basic human respect. According to
Judith Lewis Herman, Director of Training at the Victims of Violence Program at Cambridge Hospital, this results in damage to the sense of self­identity and self­worth
and, for survivors of sexual abuse, generates subsequent and chronic feelings of shame, doubt, guilt, and inferiority (53–54). Louise DeSalvo, writing about the effects
of incest in her introduction to Virginia Woolf, notes that such abuse
forces the survivor into abandoning the belief in her own personal worth, the possibility of her own personal safety, the belief that the world is a meaningful and comprehensible
place. To have been incestuously abused means that someone who should have given you care, and should have protected you, saw you as being fit for abuse. (11)

If a survivor blames herself for being abused, or represses the memories, she can retain the myth that "the world is [otherwise] a meaningful and comprehensible place"
and maintain the standard cultural illusion that if she acts

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 48

properly, she will be safe (Herman 53–54). This psychological sleight of hand, however, creates an enormous amount of psychological tension, manifesting itself in a
wide range of self­destructive and anti­social behaviors, physical ailments, and psychological disorders (Herman and Hirshfield 12, 139–140). Often, it is in seeking
help in dealing with these symptoms that women begin to recall repressed memories and thereby begin the recovery process. Recovering a positive sense of identity
and feeling of self­worth is a long and terrible struggle (for many, a lifelong task), but according to the work of Herman and others, survivors can and do succeed in
reversing much of the psychological damage (123–154).
One of the major components of the recovery process is the establishment of a coherent personal narrative that not only fits with the survivor's memories and
perceptions, but also fits into the social constructions or cultural norms available to her. This task is often facilitated by writing about the abuse and the feelings,
people, places, and events associated with it. Writing provides the survivor with a psychological distance that allows her the possibility of analyzing her past. As Toni
A.H. McNaron and Yarrow Morgan note in their preface to Voices in the Night, "Writing shapes, focuses, limits, and establishes minimal distance." They also
suggest that working through memories in writing contributes to a sense of empowerment:
Bringing [our worst feelings and fantasies] out of the shadows began to get them to manageable size. If a poem or scene could be shaped from the garbage heap of our memories,
our bodies and psyches could begin to heal themselves. If letters could be written and actually sent to the victimizers and family members who supported them, we could begin to
give some of the hatred and anger back to the appropriate sources and stop shouldering all the shame and blocking the reality entirely from our consciousness. (17)

In projecting her thoughts and feelings onto paper, the survivor begins to make connections, to see patterns. In constructing narratives from her constellations of
memories, she is able to "put form around what has seemed so chaotic" (19), and hence make sense of her experience.
Sociolinguist Charlotte Linde has recently examined the personal and cultural importance of personal narratives, specifically those that fit into what she calls "the life
story." Linde asserts that "all the stories and associated discourse units [that make up the life story], told by an individual during the course of his/her lifetime ... have as
their primary evaluation a point about the speaker" and provide a highly important social opportunity for establishing self­identity (21). She further maintains that they
are "significant resource[s] for creating [one's] internal, private sense of self,'' and perhaps even more crucially that they are "major resource[s] for conveying that self
to and negotiating that

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 49

self with others" (98). Linde has examined three characteristics of the self that are "maintained and exchanged through language"—continuity of the self through time,
the reflexivity of the self, and the relation of the self to others (100). Each is significant to both the personal narratives of sexual abuse survivors and to the recovery
process.
Regarding the first characteristic, Linde notes that a person's sense of self "should be continuous—legato rather than staccato. A proper self is not a pointillist self,
consisting of isolated moments of experience that may be remembered but do not touch or influence one another" (100–101). She draws on the work of psychologist
Daniel Stern who has noted that without the sense of continuity, there can be "temporal disassociation, fugue states, amnesias, [a sense of] not 'going on being'" (99)—
symptoms often reported in survivors of sexual abuse (Herman 86–87, 184–185). This lack of continuity is due to the repression of traumatic memories, a protective
psychological mechanism present in most survivors that prevents access not only to memories of the abuse itself, but also to those of associated events and feelings
(some of which may be years apart). (Re)establishing this sense of continuity is a crucial factor in the recovery process, and constructing personal narratives of
traumatic experience facilitates the process of breaking down repressive blocking in two important ways: 1) writing offers a sense of control through psychological
distancing and therefore gives a survivor a sense of safety, and 2) narration adheres to this culture's sociolinguistic requirement of temporal sequencing, thereby pushing
a survivor to "fill in the gaps." According to Linde, the "narrative presupposition," which is tacitly held by speakers of English and most other western languages, causes
interlocutors to assume "that the order of clauses in the narrative can be taken to mirror the order of events in [the] real world'' (68). For instance, on hearing the
sentence, I got upset and I left my papers at the office, speakers of English assume that the first event (getting upset) caused the second (leaving the papers),
whereas I left my papers at the office and I got upset is assumed to mean that the forgotten papers caused the speaker's perturbation (111). Because the logic of
English is post hoc ergo propter hoc, a survivor, in the process of "getting the sequence right," not only recaptures her memories, but also builds temporal self­
continuity into the fabric of the narrative itself.
Further, in writing about the past, a survivor is able to establish the second characteristic Linde refers to, the "reflexivity of the self" (Herman 122). This is the ability to
treat the self as "other" to gain distance and perspective (100). Without this reflexivity, she quotes Stern as saying, "there can be paralysis, the sense of non­ownership
of self­action, the experience of loss of control to external agents" (99)—again symptoms reported by many survivors. The narrative process, because it entails the
self­in­the­present­as­writer relating an incident about the self­in­the­past­as­subject, creates a distinction between the

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 50

narrator and protagonist and thus interposes distance between them. Because narrative is by definition past tense, it provides the survivor both the distance and
perspective from which to examine, reflect on, and adjust the presentation of the self she is inscribing. This "ability to relate to oneself externally, as an object or as an
other," Linde notes, "pertain[s] particularly to narrative," because the act of personal narration requires self­observation and the presentation of a self­identity (120–
121). Moreover, personal narratives are fundamentally involved with the social evaluation of the participants and their actions and always involve the question of
whether or not an action (and therefore the actor) is expected or proper. This evaluation is primarily internal and, in writing about the past, the writer is forced to
reflect on and judge herself and others involved in the story—obviously at a ''removed standpoint" (121). As Linde observes, "All questions of 'How am I doing?'
require the evaluations of an observer and narrator who are related but not identical" (121).
Although self­reflexivity is to some extent supported by every speech act, it is perhaps most firmly established in narration, where it allows for the presentation of the
moral value of the self—which, Linde suggests, is one of the most important functions of personal narratives. Significantly, she asserts, "People do not want just any
objectifiable self; they want a good self, and a self that is perceived as good by others" (122). This is certainly no less true for survivors of sexual abuse than for the
general population. It is in fact arguable that for survivors the establishment of a "good" or moral self is of mortal significance: Those who have been sexually abused
are more likely than their peers to disfigure themselves, severely abuse drugs or alcohol, be raped (again), become involved in other abusive relationships, and
experience suicidal tendencies—on which they often act (DeSalvo 11). Unsurprising, then, is Herman's observation that "many or even most psychiatric patients are
[sexual abuse] survivors" (122).
Related to the reflexive function of establishing a moral self is the ability to see the self as related to but separate from others, another characteristic which Linde
suggests is "maintained and exchanged through language." For example, reflexivity is established linguistically in a number of ways most basically by linguistic markers
that formally distinguish between persons (e.g., pronouns). More importantly for this discussion, however, the social and interactive nature of narrative itself establishes
this property of distinguishability in two ways. First, narration is a relational act which necessarily implicates an addressee (even if the addressee is the writer herself).
Second, the narrator indicates her relation to the protagonist and to other characters in her narrative, either implicitly or explicitly (102). Thus, narrative is, as Linde
points out, "an extremely powerful tool for creating, negotiating, and displaying the moral standing of the self." For while narratives may be created for a variety of
reasons and with many points in mind, "part of the hidden point of narrative

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 51

is to show that the narrator knows what the norms are and agrees with them" (123). By establishing herself as a moral and therefore worthy member of society, the
survivor necessarily distinguishes herself as separate from but related to others. The act of constructing personal narratives of traumatic experience facilitates the
process of breaking down repressive blocking.
Often, while working to re­establish her sense of self­worth and independence, a survivor will break off her ties and identifications with her abuser(s) and any friends
and family members who refuse to acknowledge and support her in her recovery. This is usually when she begins to listen to what Belenky, Clinchy, Goldberger, and
Tarule, in their work on women's development have called "the 'still small voice' within" (McNaron and Morgan 40–46). At this point, they note, she generally finds
"an inner source of strength," and a fundamental transition follows that has "repercussions in her relationships, self­concept and self­esteem, morality, and
behavior" (54). One of the frequently reported repercussions is seeking out other survivors with whom to identify. This allows for support of her ''new self," her
remembering, and her recovery. Crucial to this transition is the sharing of personal narratives (Herman 205–213). As McNaron and Morgan reported, "The sharing of
undiscussable, taboo information left millions of women no longer believing that we were the only ones not to fit society's ideals. Millions of women began to view our
own lives and the lives of other women as more accurate than literature, social prescriptions, statistics" (16). A survivor needs a community that validates her
experience and sense of self. Personal narratives in both spoken and written form provide the vehicle for communal exchange and growth because, in their
constructions of coherence, they necessarily make (at least) tacit reference to both personal beliefs and social norms and expectations and allow for an examination
and potential reformulation of the available subject positions and cultural constructions that endanger women.
A woman can use her writing to empower both herself and others by confronting denial, sorting out the cultural narratives that cast women as victims, and reinscribing
herself as self­empowered and resistant to attack. Herman, pointing to the importance of reconstructing life stories in the recovery process, notes, "remembering and
telling the truth about terrible events are prerequisites both for the restoration of the social order and for the healing of individual victims" (1). In her work with
Cambridge Hospital's Victims of Violence Program, she has identified three stages in the recovery process that are entailed in (re)constructing the survivor's life story
and coherent self­concept: remembrance and mourning, re­establishing a coherent self, and re­establishing connections with others. At each of these stages, personal
narratives in which a survivor explores sexual abuse can be of great value, because the reality of what happened (sexual abuse) and society's need for denial conflict
head­on and thwart attempts to make sense of, let alone grow beyond, these experiences.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 52

According to Herman, reconstructing a survivor's life story begins with a review of her life before the trauma and the circumstances that led up to the event (175).
Many of the first person narratives in anthologies such as Voices in the Night, The Courage to Heal, and I Never Told Anyone are representative of the writing
done during the first stage of the recovery process, that of remembering and mourning. Reclamation of the survivor's earlier history is crucial "in order to 'recreate the
flow' of [her] life and restore the continuity with the past," Herman asserts, adding that the survivor should be encouraged to relate all "her important relationships, her
ideals and dreams, and her struggles and conflicts prior to the traumatic event" (McNaron and Morgan 41–42). This exploration, she explains, provides a context
within which the trauma can be understood and integrated (176).
Gudrun Fonda, a contributor to Voices in the Night, in writing about her experiences with her sexually abusive father provides an excellent example of this process of
reconstruction. Her narrative "Daddy's Girl" begins with the explanation that her father had gone "overseas in the army" just before she was born and returned
approximately five years later. Gudrun's mother and her mother's best friend (and apparently her lover) Meg had raised Gudrun up until this point, and she notes that
they were very happy. However, when her father returns he realizes "the change in circumstances,'' and, as Gudrun tells it,
He was outraged, and he had a gun. My mother and Meg were pretty young, around twenty­two at the time. They moved out, and took me with them to a one room apartment. My
father stayed in the house, and kept everything. ... We were hiding.
Then there was the divorce. My father got custody of me. Some adult, I guess a social worker, explained what had happened in the courtroom. The social worker told me what a
divorce was and that my parents were parting for good. I didn't believe her. Meg and Mom were my parents and I knew they loved each other, so I didn't believe they were getting
divorced. The social worker looked at me as though I were incurably thick, and explained who my parents were. She told me how lucky I was that my father had returned to give me
a normal home. (40)

The second step Herman reports is the reconstruction of the traumatic event as a recitation of fact. She reports that an "organized, detailed, verbal account, oriented in
time and historical context," can then be assembled "out of the fragmented components of frozen imagery and sensation" (177). The narrative must also include an
account of the event, of course, as does Gudrun's, because, as Herman asserts, "A narrative that does not include the traumatic imagery and bodily sensations" does
not provide the catharsis necessary to recovery (177):

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 53
The first night I lived with him, he came into my bedroom. I pretended I was asleep. It was almost summer. I was sleeping in just my underpants with a sheet over me. He pulled
down my underpants and said, "You won't grow up to be like you mother, I'll see to that." I did not open my eyes or make a sound. I thought he would leave. Instead he started to
rub what felt like a mushy finger between my thighs. I started to cry. ... He said, "You will like this, you will learn to like this, you'll be glad I'm doing this." Every night that week he
came into my room. I hated going to sleep. (40–41)

Herman explains that the narrative must also include the survivor's response to the event and the responses of important people in her life (177), as does Gudrun's.
After her father manipulates the court into denying her mother visitation rights, Gudrun is not able to talk to her until some time later when, after noticing her mother
surreptitiously watching her father drop her off at school, she takes her chances and sneaks out to her. At first, Gudrun's mother is "very surprised and frightened" and
wants her to go back into the school, but when Gudrun begins to cry and tells her about her father's abuse, her mother picks her up and runs with her to the car:
Once she was inside, I think she felt safer. I had stopped crying. She was looking wild eyed. She asked me questions. I told her details. She cried and cried, "My baby, my baby,
my poor baby," gasping and choking until I became frightened. Then she tried to stop crying to comfort me. She said I never had to go back there again. It was a promise. (41–42)

Gudrun relates that although her mother and Meg take her "that day in the car and [drive] very far," they are apprehended by the police the next day; a subsequent
attempt also proves futile, Gudrun's mother is incarcerated, and her father moves them to another state (42–43). What Gudrun learns through all this is that while her
mother and Meg love and believe her, her father cannot be trusted and the law has no interest in her story. The little self­esteem and strength she retains during the
course of her childhood, despite the abuse, are based on her firm belief that while some (her father and, apparently, the courts) see her as "fit for abuse," she is loved
and valued by others.
"At each point in the narrative," Herman remarks, "the survivor must reconstruct not only what happened but also what she felt. The description of emotional states
must be as detailed as the description of the facts" (177). Accordingly, Gudrun notes that because her father "had a gruff kindness, actually an extravagant side, that
made me love him. [But] loving him made me so confused that I hated him for confusing me" (43). When Gudrun is not yet eight her father begins raping her. When
this happens, she tries to kill herself and, when unsuccessful, tells her new stepmother about the assaults.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 54

Her stepmother, however, "washed my mouth out with soap. She said I was a crazy liar. She said God would punish me for trying to break up her marriage [and] told
my father and he beat me and kicked me. All my baby teeth that were left got knocked out. He said that no one would believe me" (44). Again, she becomes suicidal:
"I wanted to die. ... I knew he would win against me. I would run out into the field and dig a deep hole and bury my face in it and scream" (44). Once again, she learns
most people will not believe her, that she is not valued, that telling makes it worse. The emotional burden is nearly untenable.
In telling her story, however, a survivor begins her recovery. When it is recounted, Herman maintains, "the trauma story becomes a testimony," a story which is no
longer about humiliation and shame, but about virtue and dignity. It is a process by which a survivor regains what she had lost (181). Again, Gudrun's narrative
provides an excellent example: After enduring another six years' abuse, Gudrun summons the courage to leave her abusive father and stepmother. Having escaped, she
now believes in herself and has confidence in her ability to survive, reporting, "I don't think they can find me here in New York City. I'm going to find a job. ... I plan to
save some money and then I'm going to try to find my mother and Meg" (46). Herman refers to the survival narrative as "testimony" because it has both a "private
dimension" and a ''public aspect," is both "confessional and spiritual" as well as "political and judicial." "Testimony," she notes, "links these meanings" and gives a "new
and larger dimension to the [survivor's] individual experience" (181). When kept private, personal narratives such as Gudrun's offer their authors a safe place to work
through the aftermath of trauma and, when published, give others permission to remember, identify with, and make sense of the abuse they suffered.
Once a survivor has gotten out her story, and thereby integrated the traumatic memories into her consciousness, she has reached the second stage of recovery, that of
re­establishing a strong and coherent sense of self. Herman writes, "Having come to terms with the traumatic past, the survivor faces the task of creating a future. She
has mourned the old self that the trauma destroyed; now she must develop a new self. ... In accomplishing this work, the survivor reclaims her world" (196). At this
point she can begin to take steps to "increase her sense of power and control [and] protect herself against future danger" (197). Personal narratives of successful self­
defense such as those included in Her Wits About Her: Self­ Defense Success Stories by Women are representative of the survivor narratives told at this stage. In
(re)writing themselves as strong and resourceful, unwilling to yield their right to safety, survivors "can begin to reconstruct the normal physiological response to danger,"
Herman explains, and in doing so "rebuild the 'action system' that was shattered and fragmented by the trauma" (198).

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 55

In order to (re)inscribe herself as strong and resourceful, a survivor must have alternative models to the cultural narratives offering only passivity and victimization to
women. Many of the contributors to Her Wits About Her reported being extremely passive by social training or pacifists by political commitment, but they also knew
of women who had fought back, women they were able to pattern their defensive actions after when it became necessary. One of these women, Rashida, observes, "I
have always been a passive person, taught to compromise instead of [using] force—an unusual attitude in my rough neighborhood" (182). However, things changed
for her when she was grabbed and pulled into a car while walking home one evening. She reports, "I began to get angry. These [five] men had placed me in a situation
where I felt there was no compromise. I had to either fight and get away, or submit to being raped repeatedly" (182). A high school student at the time of her
abduction, Rashida tells of how she "sat quietly while we rode to an old cemetery," but notes that when the men stopped the car she was ready:
Most of the guys got out of the car, except for the one on my right. He had put his arm around my neck to keep me in place. The others were outside of the car taking their pants
down. When one of them climbed into the backseat and moved towards me, I snapped. I bit the arm that held me, hit the guy behind me in the gut with my right elbow, and kicked
the guy coming toward me, all at the same time. The one holding me let go, and the one facing me got out of the car, hurt. I got out of the car quickly and ran. The other men were
so surprised, they didn't move fast enough to stop me. (183)

Physically and emotionally bruised, but alive, she learns from the police the next morning that "a young man had come to the emergency room with a severe human bite
that required stitches on his right arm" (184). Empowered by her sense of herself as strong and resourceful, she asserts, "I would never allow anyone to take my
dignity and my control away from me now" (184). In fighting back, she has empowered herself by rejecting the role of victim; in telling her story, she has (re)inscribed
a strong and coherent self.
While these personal narratives are important to the recovery process of their authors, they also serve an important role in the recovery of other survivors who read
them, serving not only as triggers for repressed memories, but also as patterns for further (re)inscriptions. Denise Caignon, who along with Gail Groves founded
Women Who Resist: The Success Stories Project and edited the subsequent anthology, Her Wits About Her, observes that women are hungry to hear and tell tales
of successful self­defense: "When I would mention to a woman that I was collecting stories about women who fight back,

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 56

a common response was a delighted smile and 'Oh, I've got one!' or 'I have this friend who. ...,' as if she had just been waiting for the chance to tell her story" (xxxii).
Included in this anthology is the inspiring "Asian, Female and Fierce," written by a young Japanese­American woman who uses the pseudonym Cindy Nakazawa. Her
story occurred while she was "working graveyard shift as an X­ray technician in a large hospital," in an area that was completely isolated:
[I] was sitting on a chair with other chairs right next to it. The guy, who must have been waiting in the file room, dropped a blanket on my head, grabbed my throat, and pushed me
down on the chairs. ... [He said], "Put your hands down by your sides." ... So I said, "Fuck you, I'm not going to do that." I just grabbed his little finger and bent it all the way back
to get him to let go. And I knew that I couldn't come up, because of the pressure coming down on my throat, so I'd have to go down. I kicked the chairs out from under me, fell
onto the floor and rolled up in a ball. I was right in front of his groin, so I figured, I'm going for it. I punched him right in the balls, and he flew back about four feet. ... I went after
him and ... he made a beeline out of the file room and I ran after him ... all the way through the emergency room and out. (178–179)

Cindy's story clashes with stereotypical ideological patterns. After the attack, the police told her that, being "small, Asian, and female," she was in a high­risk category.
"People kind of feed on that," she notes, "because they associate Oriental with being submissive, and they look at small, that's another check, and they look at female,
that's another check. So they automatically think, Easy" (180). But being prepared physically and psychologically for self­defense pays off:
The police told me I probably have never been hurt because I've been very aggressive in my actions. When the attacker came in, all of a sudden he was faced with somebody who
wasn't going to give in. Attackers would much rather go for an easier mark, so they'll just give up on you. (179)

Women like Cindy refuse the "victim" subject position and reclaim their power by (re)writing the cultural expectations of who women are and how they conduct
themselves. In doing so, they provide themselves and others new ways to imagine being in this culture. When these life writings are kept private, they empower the
survivor; when they are shared, they offer strength and new possibilities to others as well.
Herman reports that by working through the first two stages (those of remembrance and mourning and of rebuilding a self­image), the survivor gradually gains the
ability to enter the third stage—reconnecting with a com­

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 57

munity; for while "helplessness and isolation are the core experiences of psychological trauma, empowerment and reconnection are the core experiences of
recovery" (197). As Groves, speaking of what were once her "private nightmares," reports, "Now I see them as common to the everyday terror of having been born
female" (xviii). Caignon echoes this realization with her report of her recurring nightmare in which gangs of men chased her, "threatening me with death or worse.
Fleeing their leering faces, I [made] my way, alone, down the well­worn labyrinths, across those underground rivers polluted with women's fears" (xxix). After
collecting the success stories, however, she realized she was "not alone at all, but running stride for stride with all the other dreaming women who explore their fear,
and their response to it while their bodies sleep'' (xxix). In moving through the stages of the recovery process, a survivor learns to trust and depend on herself for her
own safety. Once she is secure in this independence, she can build alliances with others, for only when she knows she can depend on herself can she comfortably enter
into relationships of interdependence.
A woman's sense of who she is determines how she responds to the world, what possibilities she allows herself, either the actions she takes or the subject positions by
which she defines her life. Her self­concept and sense of self­worth determine what she expects of and accepts from both herself and others. If she sees herself as
unworthy, she will more than likely end up a victim. If she sees herself as strong and empowered, she is more likely to take whatever steps necessary to protect
herself. Crucial to a woman's self­concept in the present is her understanding of her past: what she is today is a direct consequence of that understanding, an
understanding that a survivor can modify through the recovery process. For, while traumatic events shatter a victim's sense of self, personal narratives offer a safe
space in which to make sense of, and subsequently diminish, the psychological damage. By (re)inscribing a positive sense of self­identity and (re)constructing her
subject position through writing, a survivor empowers herself; by sharing these texts, communities of survivors can empower themselves; and by (re)formulating the
metanarratives they can gradually transform the culture.
Works Cited
Bass, Ellen, and Louise Thornton, eds. I Never Told Anyone. New York: HarperCollins Publishers, 1983.
Bass, Ellen, and Laura Davis. The Courage to Heal. New York: Harper & Row, 1988.
Belenky, Mary Field, Blythe McVicker Clinchy, Nancy Rule Goldberger, and Jill Mattuck Tarule. Women's Ways of Knowing: The Development of Self, Voice,
and Mind. New York: Basic Books, 1986.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 58

Caignon, Denise, and Gail Groves, eds. Her Wits About Her: Self­Defense Success Stories by Women. New York: Harper & Row, 1990.
DeSalvo, Louise. Virginia Woolf: The Impact of Childhood Sexual Abuse on Her Life and Work. New York: Ballantine, 1989.
Herman, Judith Lewis. Trauma and Recovery. New York: Basic Books, 1992.
Herman, Judith Lewis, with Lisa Hirschman. Father­Daughter Incest. Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press, 1981.
Linde, Charlotte. Life Stories: The Creation of Coherence. New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1993.
McNaron, Toni A.H., and Yarrow Morgan, eds. Voices in the Night: Women Speaking About Incest. Pittsburgh and San Francisco: Cleis, 1982.
Stern, Daniel N. The Interpersonal World of the Infant: A View from Psychoanalysis and Developmental Psychology. New York: Basic Books, 1985.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 59

SURVIVING
Historically, societal norms dictated that what happened in the home was private and should remain unspoken even there. The silence imposed on the topic of
domestic violence has made it difficult to understand fully what women experienced. Women did find ways in which to write about their lives and the lives of women
around them, but frequently those ways were privatized, as in the copious diaries of Virginia Woolf or the trail diaries of American frontier women, or secretive, as in
the hidden poems of Emily Dickinson or the minute novelettes of the young Charlotte Brontë. More public writing, like Cather's and Woolf's fiction as well as captivity
narratives and other expressly autobiographical writing (slave narratives for instance), was often motivated by specific goals, both practical and artistic, of making life
tolerable for the writers, of exercising their considerable gifts, of making a place for themselves within a community which recognized and honored their presence. Of
course there are great risks involved in revealing one's innermost needs for affirmation and healing. Those risks certainly account for a great deal of women writers'
ambivalence about the practice as well as for the choice to keep one's writing secret, protected from outside eyes.
The essays in this section all explore the various methods of surviving—through writing—the mental, emotional, and physical consequences of a culture and/or family
which tolerates the oppression of women. Historically, the essays range from mid­nineteenth century with Brontë's juvenilia to mid­twentieth century with Cather's and
Woolf's later work. All of the writing predates what we might think of as the un­silencing of women's voices that commenced with the current women's movement.
Indeed, to write at all, a woman would have been opposing the status quo. Within that contested space, women writers made choices about style, content, and
rhetorical strategies that provide evidence of both anger over the past and hope for the future.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 61

Incest and Rage in Charlotte Brontë's Novelettes
Susan Anne Carlson
Charlotte Brontë, between the ages of thirteen and twenty­three, created a secret fantasy world called Angria, a world that she constructed in hundreds of pages of
tiny manuscripts that make up her juvenilia (Alexander, Early Writings 3). Brontë did not write these alone; until 1833 the stories were a joint venture with her two
sisters, Anne and Emily, and her brother Branwell (Alexander, Early Writings 62), and the later works, including her novelettes, were written in an eleven­year
collaboration with her brother (Alexander, Early Writings 161). But the stories themselves were kept a secret from the outside world; Brontë's father and aunt never
read the juvenilia, though they knew it was being written, and none of Charlotte's school friends were ever permitted to see her writing (Gerin, Evolution 73).
Brontë uses this secret writing, this safe space, as an outlet for her erotic, forbidden fantasies, most importantly her oedipal fantasies of father­daughter seduction and
female masochism. She was probably not aware of the disturbing content of her writing, since she wrote these texts with her eyes closed in a half­conscious, trancelike
state (Gerin, Novelettes 16). But since an underlying masochistic theme is apparent in all of Brontë's novels, these overt, disturbing stories force us to question
Brontë's handling of romance in her mature novels: Jane Eyre and Villette. Could the same fantasies of father­daughter love appear in those novels as well, only in a
more covert and sophisticated form?
These issues have been debated before; the transcriber of much of Brontë's juvenilia, Christine Alexander, has suggested a father­daughter seduction theme (Early
Writings 215), and Diane Sadoff, in her book Monsters of Affection: Dickens, Eliot & Brontë on Fatherhood (1982), argues that Brontë's "repeated subject
matter" is "a woman's desire and its object, the figurative father" (129), suggesting that this theme continues in Jane Eyre and Villette. Though all these critics mention
the themes of seduction and masochism in the juvenilia, they don't spend much time studying those themes in the texts. This chapter, therefore, will offer one of the few
close readings of Brontë's juvenilia, primarily her novelettes, written between 1836 and 1839.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 62

Though there is a large body of criticism on Brontë's novels, there are very few interpretations of the juvenilia, mainly because many of these texts were unknown to
literary critics until quite recently; complete transcriptions were just finished in 1991. In 1856, Mrs. Gaskell received a packet of tiny papers written in microscopic
print from Charlotte Brontë's widower, Arthur Bell Nicholls. The papers contained all the juvenilia written by the four Brontë children, including the stories and poetry
Charlotte Brontë wrote between the ages of thirteen and twenty­three (Alexander, Early Writings 3). In 1895, the juvenilia were put up for auction, and separate
pages of the original manuscripts were scattered all over England and America (Alexander, Early Writings 4). It has been only in the last fifty years, with Fannie
Ratchford's groundbreaking study in 1941, and transcriptions by Winifred Gerin in the 1970s and Christine Alexander in the 1980s, that much of the juvenilia has been
published. The long process of piecing the manuscripts back together began with Ratchford in 1921 and was just completed in 1991 (with most of the original
manuscripts collected in the Brontë Parsonage in Haworth, England). Even with the collections together, transcription has been slow: the manuscripts are tiny
(averaging one inch in length), and the writing is minuscule and cramped, almost impossible to read without the use of a magnifying glass (Alexander, Edition Volume
II xxiii). Problems in locating and transcribing the documents have meant that much of Charlotte Brontë's childhood writing has only become available to scholars
within the last three years.
The body of juvenilia is divided into three parts: The Glasstown Saga (1829–1832), which establishes a fairy tale­like empire in Africa, run first by the Brontë children
(as the four "geniis") and later by the Duke of Wellington; The Rise of Angria (1834–1836), in which the Duke's eldest son wins a parcel of land "east of Glasstown,"
and becomes the Duke of Zamorna, ruling this new territory called Angria; and The Angrian Legend (1836–1839), in which Angrian characters and politics are
developed in a series of five romances, called the "novelettes." Except for the Glasstown Saga, which seems to be a collaboration among all four Brontë children, the
formation and development of Angria is written by Charlotte and Branwell Brontë (Alexander, Early Writings 62).
This chapter focuses on Brontë's novelettes, written between 1836 and 1839 and considered the most sophisticated writing in her juvenilia. Though the novelettes are
not technically considered juvenilia, having been written in Brontë's early twenties, they are linked to earlier childhood writing because they cover the same ground: the
Angria of the novelettes is an extension of the same fantasy world that Charlotte Brontë had developed since the age of thirteen, and the two Byronic heroes, the Duke
of Zamorna and the Earl of Northangerland, are the adult versions of Arthur Wellesley and "Rogue," who both appear by 1830 in the juvenilia (Alexander, Early
Writings 80). The five

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 63

novelettes are extended romances with recurring characters: Passing Events, a series of disconnected scenes in which Mina Laury is introduced; Julia, scenes of
Angria in which Caroline Vernon and her mother, Louisa Dance, are introduced; Mina Laury, the story of Zamorna's faithful, masochistic mistress, who rejects the
proposal of another man; Captain Henry Hastings, a story in which Henry—a young man patterned after Branwell Brontë—is punished for murder, while his sister
tries valiantly to save him; and finally Caroline Vernon, in which fifteen­year­old Caroline is seduced by her guardian, the Duke of Zamorna.
The transciber of most of Brontë's juvenilia, Christine Alexander, would argue that in fact the juvenilia is Charlotte Brontë's literary apprenticeship, her experimentation
with fantasy and gothic styles, before she moves on to novels grounded in realism, most notably The Professor and Jane Eyre (Alexander, "Kingdom" 426). This
private "game," which lasted most of Brontë's childhood and all of her adolescence, was a way for the young Brontës to amuse themselves in the isolation of Haworth,
and to experiment with all the literary styles and language they were picking up from their voracious reading. As Alexander says, "Writing was a game for the young
Brontës: a maze constructed chiefly from literary and visual models—from the Annuals and the works of Scott, Byron, Hogg, and Martin, among others—a maze (or
web, as Brontë herself called it) constructed to confuse and amuse not only her siblings but her imagined audience" (Alexander, ''Kingdom" 436).
Certainly the juvenilia are predominantly play, which accounts for the disjointedness of the texts, and the often humorous, satiric tone of the stories. But as Brontë
begins writing her adolescent romances (1833–1839), her interest in her characters becomes an obsession—she writes in a "trancelike" state, and the characters
appear to her as if they had a life of their own (Alexander, Early Writings 243). When the twenty­year­old Brontë is teaching at Roe Head School, and is immersed
in the world of her novelettes, the stories become an alternative (and much preferred) reality; the characters would appear in her classroom in "dreamlike" visions, and
the complex fantasy world "threatened," as Alexander says, "to blur different levels of reality in her mind" (Early Writings 225). Her style reflects this state of what
Winifred Gerin calls "suspended consciousness" (Novelettes 16): hurried writing full of dashes and purple prose, resulting in an erotic, unprocessed text (Sadoff 120).
It is this text in which the desires of her unconscious are apparent and disturbing: female masochism, father­daughter romance, and female rage, the same themes that
reverberate in Jane Eyre and Villette, only in much cruder form.
The novelettes are often dismissed by Brontë scholars as immature attempts at Byronic Romance, a stage in literary apprenticeship that occurs before Brontë changes
from romanticism to realism (with Ashworth and The Professor) (Alexander, "Kingdom" 436). Certainly these novelettes are in major

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 64

part a form of imitation; Charlotte is molding her heroes from the collected works of Byron on her father's shelves; she quotes freely from Cain, Manfred, and Childe
Harold throughout her juvenilia, and is familiar with other Romantic poetry as well. Brontë's early romances also reflect her fascination with the gothic; by the 1820s
the gothic form had been so overused it was being parodied (Alexander, "Kingdom" 410), but was a staple in second­rate literature, especially the ladies' magazines
brought into the Brontë home by Charlotte's Aunt Branwell (Alexander, "Kingdom" 411). By the time Charlotte begins to write her own romances, she has been
heavily influenced by the gothic stories in Lady's Magazine, Fraser's and Blackwood's Magazine, and the conventional romances she has studied in the popular
Victorian gift­books, the Annuals, three of which were in the Brontë home (Alexander "Kingdom" 414).
With all this "background" in mind, Charlotte Brontë writes a series of novelettes between the ages of twenty and twenty­three along with her brother, Branwell.
Although it is impossible to know exactly how the two collaborated, it seems that the novelettes were written by Charlotte (Branwell provided the long­term plotlines
for Angria, and Charlotte used them loosely for the extensive character descriptions and storylines). As Branwell sunk even deeper into drink in 1837, Brontë used his
plotlines even less, and turned him from collaborator into character, the brother in Captain Henry Hastings. By 1838 (when Branwell had become addicted to
alcohol and opium), the collaboration had ended (Alexander, Early Writings 161), and Brontë was writing the last novelettes, including Caroline Vernon,
independently (Early Writings 192).
This would mean that by 1838 Brontë was in control of her own secret world, a world she had placed more value in than her daily life. It would seem at this point that
Brontë could use the freedom to change the traditional role of women in the gothic, to create women who would be able to protect themselves or at least be aware of
their victimization by men. For if this is writing for the most part under her control, and writing that is in secret, why isn't it different from the traditional male romance?
Why doesn't she change theme, form, content, so women aren't the masochistic victims, and men their vile abusers? The women writers a generation before Brontë,
Jane Austen, Anne Radcliffe, and Mary Wollstonecraft, had created a new type of Romantic writing, what Anne Mellor calls the "feminine Romantic ideology" (33), in
which women establish friendly relationships with each other and with men, and avoid relationships based on possession (33–39). Their novels celebrate an "ethic of
care," in which the writers espouse a character's loyalty to family and community, ties that bind him or her to a larger society (77).
But Brontë rejects this more positive vision of romance; instead, her characters are motivated by selfishness, and there is no real community or family loyalty; for all its
trappings, Angria is an amoral, savage society (Chase 11). Though her narrative voice shifts constantly from satire to affection, she

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 65

revels in the most brutish aspects of male romance: women's abandonment to men who abuse and neglect them. Most disturbing is the fascination these stories have
with father­daughter romances, romances which culminate in Caroline Vernon, in which the fifteen­year­old Caroline is quite happily seduced by her father­surrogate.
The disturbing thematic elements of these stories may provide the point of origin for the female masochism that reverberates through all of Charlotte Brontë's later,
great heroines: Jane Eyre, Caroline Helstone, and Lucy Snowe.
In the symbolic world represented in these novelettes, the house is a male preserve and a prison for women. Women characters are rarely seen outside their homes:
Louisa Dance is under house arrest in Hawkscliffe, Mina Laury rarely leaves the Cross of Rivaulx (Zamorna's military headquarters), and Zenobia Ellrington, the
Bertha­like character in Angria, stays in self­imposed exile at her husband's estate. If we accept the convention that a woman's house can be a metaphor for her body
(Sadoff 126), an analysis of woman's space in the novels is both revealing and disturbing. No woman in Angria has private space; every room, including her bedroom,
can be intruded upon, and often a woman is threatened after a man appears suddenly in her bedroom (Passing Events), or steals into a room she had run to for safety
(Caroline Vernon). Even when a woman is physically alone, she is often being watched; when Elizabeth Hastings, for example, paces back and forth in front of a
picture window, she is being scrutinized both by her brother and by the male narrator, who is watching her from the bushes. Women's bodies are property, open to
the man or men who enter them.
Not only do these women have no private space within these houses, but the entire house is open to all comers. Mina Laury, Zamorna's ever­pleasing mistress, is a
caretaker for a house left completely unprotected with doors that are always open: "the door is constantly open & reveals a noble passage, almost a Hall, terminating
in a staircase of low white steps, traced up the middle by a brilliant carpet ... the mansion whose windows are up, its door as usual hospitably apart" (Gerin,
Novelettes 42–3). A Freudian reading of this passage suggests that Mina's sexual availability—"the door is constantly open"—is destructive; Freud's dream analysis
of his patients found that staircases and a hallway in dreams often meant a sexual act (228), and in Brontë's fantasy writing, stairs always appear when a character is
being led to or into some form of danger. Stairs in the early juvenilia, for example, usually lead to a dungeon, a torture chamber, or some kind of tomb.
Mina's role in this house is to serve as a caretaker/hostess of all Zamorna's military friends who appear at sudden notice. And more importantly, her job, as she deems
it, is to make this house satisfying to her lover's needs, submitting all her desires to make him comfortable: "it gave me a feeling of extasy [sic] to hear my young
masters's voice, as he spoke to you or Arundel or to that

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 66

stately Hartford, & to see him moving about secure & powerful in his own stronghold" (Gerin, Novelettes 45). Her house then, and symbolically, her body, are his
"stronghold," and, in fact, Brontë says Mina is his property, as much as the estate on which she lives. Mina represents selflessness to the point of self­annihilation; a
behavior Brontë both mocks (comparing Mina to a nun worshipping her god) and sympathizes with. For though she is, as Alexander says, a masochist who enjoys her
masochism (Early Writings 167), she is only reacting in the most extreme form to the plight all the Angrian heroines share: they are all abandoned and exploited by the
Byronic heroes whose "love" is neglectful at best. This is an extension of the earlier juvenilia, in which Brontë creates numerous children abandoned (Alexander, Early
Writings 213) or forced to beg for attention from cold, apathetic fathers (all of whom imitate the emotional distance of Brontë's own father). Mina's desperate need to
be loved by Zamorna just moves her more quickly towards self­annihilation; she will please Zamorna incessantly to gain his attention, until there is nothing left in her
except the need to please. Mina stays with Zamorna because she has no other choice; she has no self apart from serving him: "I've nothing else to exist for,'' she says
to one of Zamorna's aides. "I've no other interest in life" (Gerin, Novelettes 44).
When lecherous Lord Hartford invites himself into Mina's house (and body) in Mina Laury, we are not that surprised; Hartford has assumed that if Mina is "open" to
Zamorna's needs, she will be compliant to his as well. Brontë emphasizes Mina's vulnerability at the beginning of this scene; it starts with Mina walking alone on her
estate, a tiny figure passing through a huge, green lawn. The landscape image described here, a path bordered by trees, builds into a female sexual symbol:
The forest of Hawkscliffe was as still as a tomb, & its black leafless wilds stretched away in the distance and cut of [sic], with a harsh serrated line, the sky from the country—That
sky was all silver blue—pierced here & there with a star like a diamond, only the moon softened it, large, full, golden—the by­road I have spoken of received her ascending beam
on a path of perfect solitude—Spectral pines & great old beech trees guarded the way like Sentinels from Hawkscliffe—farther on, the rude track wound deep into the shades of
the forest, but here it was open & the worn causeway bleached with frost ran under an old wall—grown over with moss & wild ivy. (Gerin, Novelettes 140–1)

This path suggests the female vagina: lined with trees on either side it splits a huge lawn in two and is the entrance Hartford (on his rushing horse) uses to reach Mina.
Walking in this pathway Mina is in a "female" landscape, which both reflects her body and nurtures it, the moon lighting her path as

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 67

she walks along and bathing her in moonlight as she stands in front of her house. But this female landscape is as passive and helpless as Mina herself: the light that
shines on her also leads Hartford to her more quickly, and the earth cannot protect Mina as Hartford attacks her inside the house, leaving her to beg and plead for his
mercy.
These houses and lands symbolically portray how vulnerable these female characters are to the sexual advances of men. This vulnerability is further registered by the
heroines' bodies. Most of them are locked inside the bodies of children, bodies too small and fragile to defend against what is defined as the "evil ways" (101) of their
lovers, Zamorna and Northangerland.
The female heroines in the Angrian tales are tiny, beautifully­dressed dolls, a mixture of grown women and little girls. They represent Burke's ideal of the beautiful (as
portrayed in the Annuals): a small, helpless and delicate creature, "delicate" to the point of "sickliness," ''with a voice that is soft, sweet, clear, even, smooth—never
shrill, harsh, deep or loud" (Mellor 109). Their bodies betray them; they are too small to defend themselves (the fiery Louisa Dance is laughable when she comes up
only to Zamorna's elbow) and too weak to fight for their own needs (Mary Percy is left to freeze after her portly husband takes up all the space in front of the fire).
Like the tiny adventurers against the giant geniis of Glasstown, these women cannot fight equally, and if cajoling and sweet talk are not successful, they must submit to
their masters/lovers in order to survive. When Mary Percy wants to follow her husband, Zamorna (who wishes to visit his mistress), she begs and cries, but is finally
talked into obedience: "Look at that weather & tell me if it is fit for a delicate little woman like you to be exposed to? ... —you may well clasp those small, silly
hands—so thin I can almost see through them—and you may well shake your curls over your face—to hide its paleness from me..." (130–131).
In their helplessness, these characters reflect Brontë's knowledge of the Annuals: the stories by women, especially Letitia Landon, stress female helplessness in the
face of injustice and male aggression; women were consistently forced to submit and endure cruelty (Mellor 112–113). But Brontë goes a step further than Landon;
for what makes her female characters helpless makes them infinitely desirable. The Angrian men are most attracted to women who resemble children, their tiny hands
and slender feet (Gerin, Novelettes 303), their weakness compared to male strength. Zamorna, when tender, calls his wife and two mistresses "little girls" (Gerin,
Novelettes 47), and it is when these tiny women are trembling and frightened that he most desires them.
Brontë takes the common Victorian assumption that women are by nature closer to children than adults (Kincaid 14), and sexualizes it, so that the more childlike the
woman is, the more appealing she is to her lover. In this way Brontë's fantasy world is very similar to Victorian pornography, in which "the cult of the little girl" (Rush
56) was at its height, and the greatest sexual

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 68

arousal derived from images of a man raping a young virgin, "the younger the better" (Marcus 156). A thriving prostitution market provided the product; as Stephen
Marcus observed in The Other Victorians, "there was a considerable trade in the bodies of children that had been going on for years in London" (156). That "trade''
included an international white slave market that serviced men in Europe and America (Rush 63) and a thriving prostitution ring in London, in which young girls were
kidnapped, raped, and then sold to wealthy Englishmen for a price: "twenty pounds for a healthy working girl between the ages of fourteen and eighteen; a hundred
pounds for a middle­class girl of the same age; and as much as four hundred pounds for a child from the upper class under age twelve" (Marcus 64).
In Angria, adult women are considered sexually attractive if they look and behave like little girls. If adult women are defined by men (and by themselves) as sexual
objects, and if childlike women are especially desirable, little girls become sexual objects in themselves. The story Caroline Vernon in Brontë's juvenilia illustrates this
point and goes beyond it; it is a clear adult­child romance, but it is also a fulfilled oedipal fantasy. The daughter (Caroline Vernon) desires her surrogate father,
Zamorna. After an intensive sexual rivalry with her mother, she successfully banishes her mother and is, quite enjoyably, seduced by her father (Sadoff 126). Though
the story in many ways parallels the conventional Romantic seduction tale, it is unusual because it is overlaid with Brontë's overt fascination with father­daughter love.
The story begins when the father, Northangerland, receives a proposal of marriage for fifteen­year­old Caroline from the black Ashantee Quashia (who represents, in
Brontë juvenilia, male rage and lust). Quashia's description of himself as the perfect child­lover introduces the love theme of the story: "... she's young, you say, the
more need she has of a father & won't I be both father & Husband to her in one?" (Gerin, Novelettes 284). Northangerland (Caroline's father) confirms Quashia's
child­lust when he assumes that Quashia "wants to marry a little girl of ten or eleven years old" (Gerin, Novelettes 285).
This theme of father­lovers is not so shocking in the Angrian world, where mothers are neglectful or nonexistent (Alexander, Early Writings 215–16), and fathers
frequently are dangerous or lustful towards their relations. Northangerland, for example, hates his sons and hires S'Death to kill them; the same pattern of a parent
hurting his sons (by abandoning them) plays out later in Ashworth and The Professor (Alexander, Early Writings 221). Zamorna is constantly away from his own
children, and in a very early poem (an unpublished poem addressed to "Justine"), Brontë has him betraying his responsibility to Mina Laury. He promises his foster­
mother, Justine, that he will protect her daughter Mina as a surrogate­brother, and ends up seducing Mina instead (Alexander, Early Writings 214). Thus the pattern
of the father/guardian as untrustworthy, dangerous, and uncaring is well established before this novelette.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 69

Caroline Vernon's actual seduction begins when she is still a child. The first meeting between Zamorna and Caroline Vernon (in Julia) begins with a description of
Zamorna's bedroom: a room that combines both the imagery of the red room in Jane Eyre with the phallic/palace room in earlier juvenilia: "... a large chamber, with a
wide & lofty state­bed—windows shrouded in blinds, crimson carpets & curtains—& in four niches as many figures of marble, each holding out a bright candlestick
that glittered strongly through the gloom" (Gerin, Novelettes 111). Zamorna is sleeping in a little office off from this main room, separate from the entrance hall.
In the classic incest story the child wakes up, either in early dawn or late at night, to find her father/molester by her bed (Blume 44). In Brontë's novelette Julia,
Zamorna is awakened in his dark, moonlit room by the appearance of the child; the child is the intruder, the unknowing sexual temptress, and the adult must control his
immediate, sexual desire. As ten­year­old Caroline creeps into Zamorna's room he calls out her name, and the child, eager to meet him, jumps into his lap: "'... come
here, child'—The little girl needed no second invitation—in trembling excitement she sprang into the tall Officer's arms—Her nature was seen at once—her whole
constitutional turn of feeling revealed itself—She cried & shook, & in answer to some soothing endearment clasped him in her childish embrace..." (Gerin, Novelettes
114). Zamorna, on feeling the child on his lap, is overcome with sexual excitement, partly because he has been fantasizing about his wife before Caroline arrived, and
partly because Caroline reminds him of his wife (they are half­sisters, sharing the same father). In fact, Zamorna is amazed by the reflection of his wife in this child. He
says, "You will make much such a woman as your half­sister Mary I fancy—child, I could almost imagine it was her little hand that clasped mine so" (Gerin,
Novelettes 115).
As Caroline babbles away happily, expressing her innocent desire to be his wife, "That's your wife—am I like your wife? when I'm old enough I'll marry you—
" (Gerin, Novelettes 115), Zamorna with difficulty restrains his desires. "The brightening moonlight, clearly revealed her features. That eye now bent on them, could
distinctly trace even in their imperfect symmetry a foreign wildness, a resemblance which stirred sensations in his heart he would have died rather than yielded to—
Sensations he had long thought routed out—but 'Heat and Frost and Thunder had only withered the stems, the roots still remained'" (Gerin, Novelettes 114). The
openly sexual scene is on one hand culturally believable because the age of consent before 1861 was ten years old (Kincaid 70), but on the other hand it is also highly
unusual for the literature of this time; this is a scene that Brontë is creating on her own, not borrowing from conventional Romantic literature. Similar scenes would be
common in Victorian pornography, but Brontë, as a young Victorian woman and pastor's daughter, would have no access to that material.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 70

This first meeting between Zamorna and Caroline is broken up by the appearance of Caroline's mother, Louisa Vernon, not by her angry reaction to the scene but by
her deliberately ignoring it: "This singular little woman ... paused at the threshold. 'It is dark,' she said 'I dare not come in.' 'Why madam?' asked her royal jailor as
coolly as if he & she had been acquaintances of a century—She uttered a slight exclamation at his voice—'Oh God—I feel frightened!'" (Gerin, Novelettes 115).
Louisa is finally cajoled into the room, and on entering it, throws Caroline out immediately. Caroline, angry at the dismissal, refuses, until she is ordered by Zamorna to
comply.
In incest stories the child often wants the attention from the abuser on some level, and is angry at the mother for disturbing the affection (Malchiodi 145–6). Caroline's
message to her mother, "I don't thank you, Mamma" (Gerin, Novelettes 115), begins an all­out war for Zamorna's affection between mother and daughter, which
continues until Caroline's seduction by Zamorna at the age of fifteen. And as Brontë makes clear, Caroline's mother is silently recording the sexual play between the
two for the next five years, blaming the flirtation not only on Zarmona, but on her child. It is Caroline upon whom she takes out her wrath, and Caroline whom she calls
a whore, as in the scene where Louisa openly condemns her daughter in front of Zamorna and Caroline's father, Northangerland: "'I'll tell you all—' almost screamed
her ladyship—'I'll lay bare the whole vile scheme—your father shall know you, Miss—what you are & what he is—I never mentioned the subject before, but I've
noticed, & I've laid it all up & nobody shall hinder me from proclaiming your baseness aloud'" (306–307).
Why would a mother attack her daughter like this, instead of protecting her? The reasons are common to mothers of incest survivors: the overwhelming power of the
male/abuser and sexual jealousy (Malchiodi 145–6). In Julia, Brontë emphasizes Louisa's powerlessness—as Northangerland's mistress, Louisa is completely
dependent, financially and emotionally, on her lover. When Northangerland rebels against Zamorna and begins civil war in Angria, Louisa becomes a political pawn.
At the time of this first seduction, she's under house arrest in Zamorna's keeping. After Zamorna wins the civil war, Northangerland drops his mistress completely, and
Louisa becomes a dependent of Zamorna: she lives in Zamorna's house, and Zamorna becomes the guardian of her daughter Caroline. Locked in this position, Louisa
has no more power than the spouse of an abusive husband; she remains financially dependent on him, his virtual prisoner.
Not that Louisa is to be taken too seriously; she is, as Brontë makes clear, a selfish flirt, a bad mother, someone both Caroline and Zamorna would be better off
without. In Freud's female oedipal complex, the daughter, subconsciously desiring the father, rejects the mother, and does not return to her until the father has rebuffed
her sexual advances (Eagleton 155–6). In Caroline

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 71

Vernon, however, the stage is set for the daughter's forbidden desire to be fulfilled (Sadoff 126): Louisa will be in sexual competition with Caroline for Zamorna, and
Caroline will win, "killing" the mother and having the father to herself.
As the novelette Caroline Vernon begins, Louisa is maintained in one of Zamorna's houses with her daughter, Caroline. Her old lover, Northangerland, has
disappeared from the scene, and Zamorna has taken the place of father to the family; he pays the bills, he directs the little girl's studies and acts as her legal guardian.
Louisa has determined that her power base with Zamorna would be stronger if she were involved with him sexually, and has attempted long and unsuccessfully to
seduce him. Her main problem is that Zamorna is attracted to her teenage daughter, Caroline.
In Brontë's version of the mother­daughter sexual rivalry, the girl (Caroline) and the "father" (Zamorna) are not conscious of their sexual desires; it is only Louisa who
is clearly aware of the triangle and is acting upon it. Louisa forces her daughter to wear clothing that hides her developing body: "this young lady's dress by no means
accorded with her years & stature, the short­sleeved frock, worked trousers & streaming sash would better have suited the age of nine or ten than of fifteen" (Gerin,
Novelettes 305). The mother refuses to buy her daughter an adult riding habit, and constantly belittles her appearance, calling her ugly (Gerin, Novelettes 312)—all
things designed to stifle the young girl's sexuality and stall her development. And although Caroline is innocent of the real reason for Louisa's actions, she is aware that
the main cause for all her mother's behavior is sexual jealousy:
She's like as if she was angry with me for growing tall—& when I want to be dressed more like a woman & to have scarfs & veils & such things, it does vex her so—then, when
she's raving & calling me vain & conceited—a hussey—I can't help sometimes letting her hear a bit of the real truth ... she's jealous of me—because people will think she is old if
she has such a woman as I am for her daughter. (Gerin, Novelettes 308)

Brontë seems to endorse this view of Louisa as an older woman now aware that she has no sexual power over Northangerland or Zamorna (and is therefore of no
worth in this male world), trapped as a prisoner in Zamorna's house, watching him prepare her young daughter for the sexual prominence she once enjoyed. There is
very little concern shown by this mother for her daughter, only nostalgia for her old role as a sexual siren and resentment at her daughter's future success. Brontë
makes clear that Louisa cannot win this sexual battle with her daughter because she no longer has any value: her worth in Angria was as a charming mistress, but now
older and grayer, she is no match for her fresh fifteen­year­old daughter. Her hysterical fits of rage against Caroline

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 72

and Zamorna are ignored; she is labelled a liar (Gerin, Novelettes 306) and is finally banished by Caroline, who locks her mother in her bedroom. This is the last time
that Louisa appears in the novelettes.
Caroline's efforts to please the men and ignore her mother are rewarded; she is taken out of this unhealthy environment and sent to Paris to further her education, while
her mother is left to rot at Hawkscliffe. Caroline agrees with Zamorna that her mother is "not fit to be let loose on society" (Gerin, Novelettes 314). But once Caroline
returns from Paris, Northangerland's distrust of Zamorna keeps Caroline away from her guardian at all times, locked up in his house in Scotland during the great
season in Angria. The reason for isolating Caroline is economic: Caroline can make a great social marriage only if she maintains her purity, and her father desires to
maintain that at all cost.
This plot twist sets up the seduction attempt in which all the subtle sexual play comes to fruition. This guardian­ward seduction plot, which is, in reality, a displaced
father­daughter romance (Mellor 91), was quite standard by the time Brontë was writing in 1839; the plot goes back to the early eighteenth century, and tended to
have two basic structures: the guardian seducing and then abandoning the ward (Spencer 112–113), or the guardian persuading his coquette­like ward to accept a
position as his wife (Spencer 142–147). Zamorna's change from father­protector to violator is also standard; after Radcliffe's novels, the father who is really a sadistic
persecutor was a convention of the gothic romance (Mellor 91).
But Brontë is fascinated with this convention, and revises it so that the seduction is much more a forbidden fantasy (of the daughter winning the father's love) than a
scene of violation. Though she attacks Zamorna's character, the tone of the passage is gently erotic; the daughter, though totally innocent and without guile, wins all her
surrogate father's attention and love. Caroline now defines her once childish affection for Zamorna as "love" (Gerin, Novelettes 337) and sneaks out of her exile to
surprise him at his friend's estate. Brontë makes it clear that Caroline's views of Zamorna are ill­formed and naïve: she never comes to a clear understanding of what
she wants from Zamorna, and she has never clearly understood his character. She has divided him into two selves: the self of loving guardian, father­figure, and the self
of passionate lover. Such a division is common in incest stories: the two selves of the parent, switching back and forth between kind parent and rough molester, the
daddy at day versus the daddy at night. Fifteen­year­old Caroline is finally seduced by Zamorna in a room far to the back of the house where her protests could not
be heard. Zamorna quickly turns from her kind guardian to an overpowering presence she cannot control:
Here he was—the man that Montmorency had described to her—all at once she knew him—Her Guardian was gone—Something terrible sat in his place—

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 73
The fire in the grate was sunk down without a blaze—this silent lonely library, so far away from the inhabited part of the house—was gathering a deeper shade in all its Gothic
recesses. She grew faint with dread—she dared not stir—from a vague fear of being arrested by the powerful arm—flung over the back of her chair—At last—through the long &
profound silence, a low whisper stole from her lips. "May I go away?" No answer—she attempted to rise—this movement produced the effect she had feared, the arm closed
round her—Miss Vernon could not resist its strength, a piteous upward look was her only appeal—He, Satan's eldest Son, smiled at the mute prayer—"She trembles with terror"
said he, speaking to himself. "Her face has turned pale as marble within the last minute or two—how did I alarm her? Caroline, do you know me?'' (353)

The woman/child, succumbing to her own passion and trust in Zamorna's tenderness toward her (his father personality), agrees to leave with him to his retreat, and
thus seals her doom as his mistress. Her sexual worth goes down to nothing (except for Zamorna's needs), and she is kept, like her mother, as a woman/prisoner in
Zamorna's house, rejected by the rest of society, and completely dependent on him for her economic survival. But she also, at least for a short while, wins the sexual
love of her father. Jane Spencer, in The Rise of the Woman Novelist: From Aphra Behn to Jane Austen, says that the romance was attractive to women writers
because it "offered escape from male­dominated reality through a fantasy of female power" (184). For Charlotte Brontë, however, the attraction was not female
power but masochism, a revelling in erotic oedipal fantasies that promised only abandonment and pain.
With all the abuse overwhelming these female characters, is there any rebellion against the Angrian patriarchy; does Brontë ever attack the injustice of the world she
creates? Gilbert and Gubar found Bertha Rochester of Jane Eyre to be radically rebellious (The Madwoman in the Attic 339), but how would rage appear (if it
does) in this much earlier writing, where Charlotte, a still unsophisticated writer, is creating a fantasy world in which she herself is half in love with the Byronic
romance?
The novelettes portray a world in which love for women equals self­annihilation: once an Angrian woman becomes sexually involved with a man, her need for his
affection quickly becomes an addiction. Without the man, there is no "self" left; she is immediately in danger of death. This need for constant nurturance is made even
more difficult by the man's response: both the Byronic heroes of Angria (Zamorna and Northangerland) are abusive with their love, neglectful and cold towards the
women who are dependent on them. The Byronic heroes arrive and depart from their lovers at whim. When the women are compliant, the men stay until they get
bored; when the women are irritable or angry, they leave quickly. The women's need to maintain whatever love they can get overcomes all other emotions, including
anger.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 74

The process of a woman's need for love burying her rage is most apparent in the story of the strongest woman character of the juvenilia, Zenobia Ellrington. Modelled
in 1830 after the French feminist, Madame de Staë, Zenobia is wildly different from the other "angelic" women. Highly intelligent and educated (fluent in five languages,
a classics scholar) (Alexander, Early Writings 22–24), Zenobia is furious at her limited choices. In a world where being large equals power, she is tall and physically
threatening: big enough to take up space and be noticed, and strong enough to push one of the Duke's insulting sons down a flight of stairs with a "yell of ungovernable
rage" (Alexander, Edition Volume I 303). The other women have pale ghostly skin like marble angels; Zenobia looks like the wild black Ashantees with a "dark,
glowing complexion" and a "swarthy face" (Alexander, Edition Volume I 293, 313). The other women seem ''silly" to her, their angelic behavior disgusting. She calls
the Duchess merely a "handmaid for the imperious lord who domineers over her" (Alexander, Edition Volume I 302).
Zenobia's independence, however, is immediately shaken when she meets with the Duke's eldest son, Arthur Wellesley (who later becomes the Duke of Zamorna).
Her unrequited passion for him drives her mad, and she follows the young Zamorna "five hundred miles" to confront him with her jealous love. When she meets him,
she looks like a madwoman: her "dishevelled hair hung in wild elf­locks over her face, neck and shoulders, almost concealing her features, which were emaciated and
pale as death" (Alexander, Edition Volume I 343). In her jealous rage she threatens Zamorna's true love, the angelic Marian Hume: "'Viper! Viper! Oh that I could
sheathe this weapon in her heart!' Here she stopped for want of breath and, drawing a long, sharp, glittering knife from under her cloak, brandished it wildly in the
air..." (Alexander, Edition Volume I 343).
Alexander is right in describing this character as an over­the­top gothic villainess, a character the adolescent Brontë is having great fun creating ("Kingdom" 429). But
it is telling that in this overblown, violent scene Zenobia's desire to be loved at all costs has turned her anger away from its real target, Zamorna. Instead, she expresses
her rage at her rejection (with the phallic "sharp glittering knife") towards her female competition, the angelic and quite passive Marian Hume.
Zenobia's wild burst of rage seals her doom; the young Zamorna smiles at her "with contempt," and chooses Marian Hume as his wife, abandoning Zenobia for good.
Five years later, Brontë brings Zenobia into the novelettes as the wife of the cruelest Byronic hero, the Earl of Northangerland. Brontë at twenty has banished the
magic and archetypes of the old Angria, and Zenobia is left with just her defiance, a feeling she constantly represses to avoid her husband's verbal attacks.
Northangerland, still disturbed by Zenobia's latent power, sexually rejects her for a string of frivolous, "silly" mistresses (Alexander,

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 75

Edition Volume I 302). To insure Zenobia's passivity, Northangerland also maintains a barrage of verbal attacks to destroy whatever independent self she may have
left. He attacks her for her unfeminine appearance and conduct: she is not delicate or sweet, she is too hefty to be attractive; prostitutes are a more inviting sexual
prospect than she is; she is, perhaps, not really a member of the nobility at all, but an illegitimate child by a mother who was secretly a whore (Alexander, Edition
Volume I 41). In one of the many scenes where her sexuality is turned against her, Zenobia keeps her silence but lashes out in violence after her husband has left: "the
Countess said nothing, she could not speak, but a destructive crack & the splendid fragments of a shivered mirror told what she felt" (Alexander, Edition Volume I
42).
Like a good little girl, Zenobia has learned to turn her hatred onto herself, shattering her own self­image. The Zenobia of Angria turns into a parody of her earlier fairy
tale self, her huge size becomes extra girth; she is a "stout and portly" (Gerin, Novelettes 128) matron who, Brontë says, has no trouble filling up a chair with her
behind (Gerin, Novelettes 128). And the wild woman who used to roam through the woods now locks herself in her husband's house, staring vacantly out the
windows: "... a woman who in her thirtieth year has waxed so imperially stout & high that she will not even leave her own saloons for the benefit of fresh air" (Gerin,
Novelettes 50). In the passage from teenager to young woman, Charlotte Brontë transforms the Glasstown's Arthur Wellesley into the raging, Byronic Zamorna, and
the wild Zenobia into a depressed matron—a woman who stalks her sitting room the way that Bertha the madwoman will someday stalk her attic prison.
With the fate of Zenobia, Brontë refuses, even in her most secret writing, to create a woman who successfully rebels against patriarchy. The angry woman will appear
in her mature novels, but always as a failed character: Bertha Rochester a self­destructive madwoman in Jane Eyre; Shirley Keeldar an outspoken feminist in Shirley
who turns into a dejected wife once she marries Louis Moore. In Brontë's last novel, Villette, the rebellious woman has almost disappeared from the text; the only
reflection of Zenobia is Vashti, the wild actress who appears very briefly and has no real impact on the heroine, Lucy Snowe.
In one of her last novelettes, Captain Henry Hastings, written in 1838, Brontë does create a way of avoiding female masochism, though the "cure" involves the
woman isolating herself and repressing her sexuality. Elizabeth Hastings, the sister of the traitorous and destructive Henry Hastings, is Brontë's new response to male
patriarchy; she avoids the real temptation towards self­annihilating, masochistic love by avoiding men altogether, a process made easier by her ugly, "little & thin" body
(Gerin, Novelettes 180). Like Jane Eyre and Lucy Snowe, her lack of physical beauty makes her almost invisible to

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 76

men; as a male observer says, she was a "little blighted mortal," a "pale undersized young woman dressed as plainly as a Quakeress in grey" (Gerin, Novelettes 206).
In defending her brother, Elizabeth has become a pariah in her father's house, and so is left to support herself as a lady's companion and teacher, becoming the first
financially independent female character in the juvenilia.
Elizabeth Hastings is able to keep her clear rational mind and limited independence only by avoiding romance. This concept is not unique to Brontë; Wollstonecraft in
her Vindication of the Rights of Woman had argued that a woman's rationality was only possible by the "repression, even elimination, of female sexual
desire" (Mellor 34). For Brontë, however, this rationality is even more fragile, since there is no love in her world that is not defined by helpless masochism. When
Elizabeth Hastings is approached by her first admirer, William Percy, she represses her own powerful sexual urges and rejects his proposition, a difficult decision since
Percy is the first man to, like Rochester, see past her reserve to her "inmost heart" (Gerin, Novelettes 241).
Through the adolescent juvenilia, and especially the novelettes, we can see in crude form the disturbing fantasies (father­daughter seduction, masochism) and fatalism
(the failure of rebellion) that reverberate through all of Brontë's mature novels, even as they are buried underground in complex characterizations and metaphor. The
incestuous affiar between Caroline and Zamorna becomes the disturbing flirtation between Polly and Mr. Home, or Jane Eyre in love with a man who "might almost be
[her] father" (293). If the juvenilia is fulfilled erotic fantasy, and not just literary apprenticeship, then the uncomfortable themes that reoccur ten years later in Jane Eyre
are entrenched in Brontë's psyche. If readers today are still disturbed by Brontë's novels, they have good reason.
Works Cited
Alexander, Christine. The Early Writings of Charlotte Brontë. Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1983.
Alexander, Christine, ed. An Edition of the Early Writings of Charlotte Brontë: Volume I: The Glass Town Saga 1826–1832. Oxford: Basil Blackwell Ltd.,
1987.
Alexander, Christine, ed. An Edition of the Early Writings of Charlottte Brontë: Volume II: The Rise of Angria 1833–1835 Part 1: 1833–1834. Oxford: Basil
Blackwell Ltd., 1991.
Alexander, Christine, ed. An Edition of the Early Writings of Charlotte Brontë: Volume II: The Rise of Angria 1833–1835 Part 2: 1834–1835. Oxford: Basil
Blackwell Ltd., 1991.
Alexander, Christine. "'That Kingdom of Gloom': Charlotte Brontë, the Annuals, and the Gothic." Nineteenth­Century Literature 47 (March 1993): 409–436.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 77

Blume, E. Sue. Secret Survivors: Uncovering Incest and its Aftereffects in Women. New York: Ballantine Books, 1990.
Brontë, Charlotte. Jane Eyre. New York: Penguin Classics, 1985.
Brontë Charlotte. Shirley. New York: Penguin Books, 1988.
Brontë Charlotte. Villette. New York: Bantam Books, 1986.
Chase, Karen. Eros and Psyche: The Representation of Personality in Charlotte Brontë, Charles Dickens and George Eliot. New York: Methuen, 1984.
Eagleton, Terry. Literary Theory: An Introduction. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1983.
Freud, Sigmund. The Interpretation of Dreams. New York: Avon Books, 1965.
Gerin, Winifred. Charlotte Brontë: The Evolution of Genius. London: Oxford University Press, 1967.
Gerin, Winifired, ed. Five Novelettes. London: The Folio Press, 1971.
Gilbert, Sandra M., and Susan Gubar. The Madwoman in the Attic: The Woman Writer and the Nineteenth­Century Literary Imagination. New Haven: Yale
University Press, 1979.
Hogg, James. The Private Memoirs and Confessions of a Justified Sinner. London: The Cresset Press, 1947.
Kincaid, James R. Child Loving: The Erotic Child and Victorian Culture. New York: Routledge, 1992.
Malchiodi, Cathy A. Breaking the Silence: Art Therapy With Children from Violent Homes. New York: Brunner/Mazel Publishers, 1990.
Marcus, Stephen. The Other Victorians: A Study of Sexuality and Pornography in Mid­Nineteenth­Century England. New York: Basic Books, 1966.
Mellor, Anne K. Romanticism & Gender. New York: Routledge, 1993.
Ratchford, Fannie. The Brontës'Web of Childhood. New York: Columbia University Press, 1941.
Ratchford, Fannie Elizabeth, and William C. DeVane. Legends of Angria: Compiled from the Early Writings of Charlotte Brontë. New Haven: Yale University
Press, 1933.
Rush, Florence. The Best Kept Secret: Sexual Abuse of Children. New York: McGraw­Hill Book Company, 1980.
Sadoff, Dianne. Monsters of Affection: Dickens, Eliot and Brontë on Fatherhood. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1982.
Spencer, Jane. The Rise of the Woman Novelist: From Aphra Behn to Jane Austen. Oxford: Basil Blackwell Ltd., 1986.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 79

Safe Space or Danger Zone?: Incest and the Paradox of Writing in Woolf's Life
Diana L. Swanson
I: Writing and Sexual Abuse
Recent work in critical theory and cultural studies concentrates on the functions of discourse in the construction of identities, histories, and social norms, suggesting an
intimate, dialectical relationship between the stories people tell and the lives people live. 1 What is the relationship between writing and living as a "self" and an active
agent in one's social world when one has been the victim of interpersonal violence that violates and denies one's personhood and agency? Can writing be a "safe
space" in which women call tell—construct and convey—their stories of sexual abuse and assault and (re)construct competent, functional, integrated selves? Writing
involves agency, active reconstruction of one's experiences and creation of one's ideas. And writing involves inter­relatedness, communicating with others in a
common­enough language. Can these aspects of writing be an effective antidote to the experience of powerlessness, alienation, and obliteration of self that attends
rape or incest, for example?
The words of Virginia Woolf (1882–1941), survivor of incest2 and accomplished writer of fiction, biography, literary and social criticism, letters, and diaries, suggest
that the answer is yes. In a diary entry for 1933, Woolf says, "I thought, driving through Richmond last night, something very profound about the synthesis of my being:
how only writing composes it: how nothing makes a whole unless I am writing" (Writer's Diary 201). But if writing can be a "safe space" can it also be a "danger
zone"? Given Woolf's well­known and at times extreme anxiety about publication, for example, she must have experienced danger in some aspects of the writing
process.
In fact, for victims of sexual abuse to "speak out" about their experiences may at times have oppressive rather than liberatory consequences; the conditions

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 80

of disclosure must be carefully analyzed before any judgments can be made about the effectiveness or consequences of "breaking silence" (Alcoff and Gray 263 and
passim). Thus, answers to the questions outlined above must take into account the social and historical context, audience, and genre of the writing as well as what we
know about the effects of sexual abuse and the process of recovery. 3
Judith Herman, in her introduction to Trauma and Recovery, simply and eloquently outlines the dynamics of human response to trauma:
The ordinary response to atrocities is to banish them from consciousness. ... Atrocities, however, refuse to be buried. ... The conflict between the will to deny horrible events and
the will to proclaim them aloud is the central dialectic of psychological trauma. People who have survived atrocities often tell their stories in a highly emotional, contradictory, and
fragmented manner which undermines their credibility and thereby serves the twin imperatives of truth­telling and secrecy. (1)

Sexual abuse inflicts severe emotional and often physical pain and, as an act, denies the personhood of the victim. It therefore instigates the dialectic Herman describes
above, causing serious damage to the victim's memory, personality structure, and relationships to others. The recovery process must directly address and redress the
victim's loss of control over her life, loss of memory, and loss of interpersonal connection.
Woolf's posthumously published memoirs and her fiction, particularly her first novel, The Voyage Out (1915), suggest that writing for Woolf created both a safe space
for (re)constructing a self and developing a feminist critique of her family history, and a danger zone resonant with the threat of exposure, ridicule, and violation. Safety
and danger, and the strategies Woolf employs to create the one and deflect the other, depend greatly on the genre—memoir or fiction—of a work and on its expected
audience—self, friends and family, or the general public.
II: Writing as Self­Construction
In her last memoir, "A Sketch of the Past," written in 1939–40, Woolf speculates about the origins of her impulse to write and the function of writing in her life:
The shock­receiving capacity is what makes me a writer. I hazard the explanation that a shock is at once in my case followed by the desire to explain it. I feel that I have had a blow;
but it is not as I thought as a child, simply a blow from some enemy hidden behind the cottonwool of daily life; it is

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 81
or will become a revelation of some order; it is a token of some real thing behind appearances; and I make it real by putting it into words. It is only by putting it into words that I
make it whole; this wholeness means that it has lost the power to hurt me; it gives me, perhaps because by doing so I take away the pain, a great delight to put the severed parts
together. (72)

These words describe, at least in part, how Virginia Woolf's writing is a response to and a triumph over emotional pain and psychic dismemberment, particularly over
the trauma of her childhood in an incestuous family.
In this section of her memoir, Woolf distinguishes between "shocks," "blows," or "moments of being," that is, moments of emotional intensity and clarity, and what she
calls "non­being'' or "the cottonwool of daily life." Woolf explains that most of her days, as a child and as an adult, consist of non­being, a state in which life "is not
lived consciously" (70), nothing "[makes] any dint upon me" (71), nothing is memorable. Then occasionally "there [is] a sudden violent shock; something [happens] so
violently" that she remembers it all her life. This description of oscillation between cottonwool and shocks suggests the oscillation, described by psychologists and by
sexual abuse survivors themselves, between the numbness acquired as a defence against the pain and/or memories of abuse and moments of intensity when memories
and/or feelings intrude. The moments of being set off from the cottonwool also suggest the sealed off traumatic memories of abuse survivors (Herman 37–38). Many
of the moments Woolf remembers so intensely, she says, "brought with them a peculiar horror and a physical collapse; they seemed dominant; myself passive" (72).
Among these moments Woolf describes in the opening section of the memoir is a memory of her older stepbrother, Gerald Duckworth, exploring her "private parts"
when she was perhaps six, perhaps younger.
Whether a shock brings incapacitation or revelation, Woolf says, depends on her ability to explain it by "putting it into words." Finding the words to explain a shocking
"moment of being" brings that moment out of its frozen, non­verbal, sealed off state and makes it part of the ongoing narrative of her life—"puts the severed parts
together." Woolf's passion for writing was, in large part, a passion for survival and self­healing from the fragmentation caused by abuse, a passion for creating and
claiming power and efficacy, and a passion for explaining a threatening and unjust world.
Woolf's memoirs reveal how writing served to create a space for finding her own perspective on her experience, her family, and her society. In
"Reminiscences" (1907–08), "22 Hyde Park Gate" (1920 or 1921), and especially "A Sketch of the Past" (1939–40), Woolf pieces together her memories to analyze
and come to an understanding of the multiple pressures of a Victorian patriarchal family and society upon its daughters. As part of this project, she remembers, and
analyzes the impact of, her experience of incest.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 82

The Victorian middle­class family was organized around the needs and desires of the men. Woolf's mother, Julia Stephen, believed in conventional Victorian domestic
values and trained her daughters to follow in her footsteps ("Reminiscences," "A Sketch"). Virginia states baldly that ''my mother believed that all men required an
infinity of care" ("22 Hyde Park Gate" 165). After Julia's death, Leslie Stephen expected his daughters to take on the roles his wife had performed. Especially after the
deaths of their mother and their older half­sister, Virginia and her sister, Vanessa, then in their teens, were expected to minister to and sympathize with their father and
their brothers, to run the household, to make their debut in society, and radiate charm around the tea table:
While father preserved the framework of [upper­middle­class Victorian society], George filled in the framework with all kinds of minutely­teethed saws; and the machine into which
our rebellious bodies were inserted in 1900 not only held us tight in its framework, but bit into us with innumerable sharp teeth. ("A Sketch" 151–152)

George Duckworth, their older half­brother, in particular, not only insisted that his sisters "sit passive and applaud the Victorian males" but also that they accompany
him to social events, contribute to his social triumphs, and "share his views, approve of his beliefs" ("A Sketch" 154). Every party and dance was "a test" of their
womanhood and social success (156); and George entreated and commanded their attendance with kisses, embraces, and tantrums. In "22 Hyde Park Gate," Woolf
courageously revealed to her friends in the Bloomsbury Memoir Club that after these parties George brought these kisses, embraces, and more to her bed. George
clearly felt that his claim to Virginia extended not only to her love, time, loyalty, and approval, but also to her body.
Thus, by their teens, Virginia and Vanessa Stephen had been well­trained in the duties of the Angel in the House. They had learned that it was their role selflessly to
take "an infinity of care" for the needs and feelings of the men in the family, without expecting a commensurate attention on the part of others, or themselves, to
discerning and responding to their own needs and feelings. In her dedication to exploring and interpreting her own feelings and memories in her memoirs, diaries, and
novels, Woolf made a courageous break with this early training, implicitly affirming the importance and value of her own emotional life.
In her memoirs, she also remembers how writing helped her resist her own erasure. She describes how, while the outward organization of her life as a girl perforce
revolved around the requirements of the men in the family and of social tradition,

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 83
there was a spectator in me who, even while I squirmed and obeyed, remained observant, note taking for some future revision. The spectacle of George, laying down laws in his
leather arm chair so instinctively, so unhesitatingly, fascinated me. Upstairs alone in my room I wrote a sketch of his probable career; which his actual career followed almost to the
letter. ("A Sketch" 154)

Through writing, the young Virginia, up in her own room, could "revise" her experience of the moment, setting it in "some order" different from that assumed by
George, reconnecting with her own feelings and perceptions. She could criticize and distance herself from George's values and ambitions and thus begin to assert her
own different values and perspective on the world. During a humiliating time at a dance: "I recall that the good friend who is with me still, upheld me; that sense of the
spectacle; the dispassionate separate sense that I am seeing what will be useful later; I could even find the words for the scene as I stood there" (155–156). Writing
enabled her to distance herself from her experiences of humiliation, exploitation, and silence in service to her brother and through "finding the words'' build a sense of
her own perspective and thus identity.
Victims of sexual and other forms of abuse generally use a survival strategy of distancing, removing their minds from their bodies and numbing their feelings and
memories. Virginia's strategy of distancing herself through words and writing bears an affinity to this survival strategy and shares some of its advantages and
disadvantages. The advantages are immediate: emotional and physical survival. Louise DeSalvo, discussing Virginia's early journals and stories, makes the case that
writing literally "helped save Virginia Woolf's life" during some of her most difficult and painful adolescent years by serving as the medium through which she could
express what was happening to her and start to forge an autonomous and adult self (Virginia Woolf 261). In "Professions for Women," Woolf maintains that her
decision as a young writer to "kill" the Angel in the House was an act of self­defense: "Had I not killed her she would have killed me. She would have plucked the
heart out of my writing" ("Professions" 238). In 1934, she explained her continual experimentation with form and style throughout her adult career as the result of
having "to some extent forced myself to break every mould and find a fresh form of being that is of expression, for everything I feel or think" (Writer's Diary 213). For
Woolf, being was expression, expression being. Linda Brodkey maintains that Woolf "resists alienation by writing. It is not a unified self she creates in words, but a self
drafted the redrafted as possible verbal repertoires—a self born in language use" (408).
This shifting and multiple self is not something to be uncritically celebrated, however. It bears some disturbing similarities to the emotionally disconnected,

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 84

fragmented, and sometimes multiple personalities of many abuse victims who once they have learned to split off from their bodies and feelings do not know how to
reconnect. DeSalvo points out, for example, that in her juvenile diaries Woolf employed an alter ego, a "Miss Jan," who was the one who had troubles, felt afraid or
angry (Virginia Woolf: The Impact, 233–248). As an adult, Woolf does not simply say that writing helps her compose her being, but that "only writing composes
it" (emphasis added). Again in 1937, as she began a memoir of her nephew Julian Bell in response to his death in the Spanish Civil War, she wrote: "I am so
composed that nothing is real unless I write it" (Bell II 255, emphasis added). Woolf's words indicate an extreme dependence on writing to convince herself of her
own reality, to coalesce her memories and present sensations. "My writing'' and "me" are synonymous. Woolf's discussion of the interrelation of writing and being can
be read as indicating her awareness of the complex ways language constructs reality and subjectivity, as well as her sophisticated understanding of "the two people," "I
now" and "I then," and the way "this past is much affected by the present moment" and vice versa (75).
But the writing­dependent self is vulnerable in a number of ways. First, on a practical level, one cannot write all the time or about everything. Woolf often mentions in
diaries and letters how disconnected and numb she gets when she cannot write for days or weeks at a time. Second, Toni A. H. McNaron has demonstrated that
"Woolf's reliance on art to provide an order unavailable in life" and her technique of writing in scenes derived from moments of being, "moments of sharp recall," make
her vulnerable to reliving those very moments of pain, chaos, and powerlessness that she depends on writing to control ("Uneasy Solace" 251 and passim). Third,
when one shares one's writing with others or publishes it, it is one's self which one has spent such labor and pain creating that gets approved or rejected. Thus Woolf's
extreme anxiety and vulnerability whenever one of her books was published. Finally, language is incapable of bearing the burden of realizing the self completely, of fully
expressing the life of the body and its emotions. To be a self born only in language use is to be alienated from the body and distanced from experience, not rooted in
an inner, felt knowledge of existence and desire. The "self born in language use" is Woolf's great achievement in the face of the abuse and appropriation which
threatened to rob her of a vital, feeling self; it is also her tragedy. Writing for Woolf was both a symptom of her abuse and her triumph over it.
III: Writing as Reconnection
While writing was a lifeline, albeit tenuous, for Woolf through dangerous emotional waters, sharing that writing with others was often terrifying, for she

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 85

was uttering forbidden and unspeakable truths about her family, patriarchal society, and her "own experiences as a body" ("Professions" 241). Yet, communicating
with others and putting one's experience in a social, not only a personal, context is essential to overcoming the alienation caused by abuse. Hence, Woolf developed
writing strategies of coding, self­censorship, and splitting of event and affect.
Alcoff and Gray's analysis of the subversive potential of "survivor speech" (the reports of [mostly] women who have suffered rape, incest, or sexual assault) and its
silencing and recuperation by dominant discourses can help clarify the obstacles to public disclosure that Woolf faced and the efficacy as well as the limitations of her
writing strategies. Survivor speech transgresses the dominant social order by authorizing discounted or disallowed speakers such as women and children and by
presuming concepts such as "husband rapist" or "brother rapist" that are oxymoronic according to the assumptions of dominant discourses. Such moves allow and
require the reconceptualization of social roles and power structures. The dominant order generally meets the threat posed by survivor speech by silencing or
recuperation:
Silencing works by physically denying certain individuals a speaking role—for example, through institutionalization, denial of access to listeners or readers, or the controlled
administration of drugs. ... Strategies of recuperation include categorizing survivor speech as mad, as evidence of women's or children's hysterical or mendacious tendencies, or
even as testimony to women's essential nature as helpless victims in need of patriarchal protection. (268)

The confessional is the "discursive arrangement" most often deployed to recuperate survivor speech (270). Foucault traces the history of the confessional as a verifying
and normalizing civil and religious ritual in Western society from the Lateran Council of 1215 through the development of psychoanalysis and criminal psychology in the
twentieth century (The History of Sexuality, Vol. 1, cited in Alcoff and Gray 270–272). The confessional structure frames the survivor's testimony within the
discourse of an "expert"—priest, doctor, judge, psychiatrist—purporting to evaluate and interpret her words and experience in order to arrive at the "truth." Alcoff and
Gray elucidate several "dangers of the confessional" that are applicable to Woolf's situation. First, the confessional mode tends to focus ''attention on the victim and her
psychological state" and deflect it from the perpetrator and his actions, suggesting that the "problem" to be dealt with is the victim's psychology or morality not the
perpetrator's violent behavior. Second, the confessional mode assumes a necessity for interpretation of the survivor's story by an "objective" "expert." Finally, the
confessional sets up dichotomies between "experience and theory, feelings and knowledge, subjective and objective, and mind and body," dichotomies

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 86

which, like the "need" for an expert, construct the survivor herself as the least authoritative source of testimony and interpretation of her own experience and the
experiences of other survivors (279–280). In order to authorize survivor discourse, Alcoff and Gray argue that "we need to transform arrangements of speaking to
create spaces where survivors are authorized to be both witnesses and experts, both reporters of experience and theorists of experience" (282). The challenge Woolf
faced in her memoir and fiction was to transform the confessional mode of autobiography so as to authorize herself as witness and theorist.
In her life, Woolf experienced both silencing and recuperation of her story of incest. The circumstances of her life in a Victorian family in the late nineteenth century
made it impossible for her to speak out about the incest while it was occurring. Quentin Bell alludes to the Stephen sisters' training in sexual "purity" and ignorance and
explains that:
it would have been hard for [George's] half­sisters to know at what point to draw a line, to voice objections, to risk evoking a painful and embarrassing scandal: harder still to find
someone to whom they could speak at all. Stella, Leslie, the aunts—all would have been bewildered, horrified, indignant, and incredulous. (43)

To speak out would only have brought Woolf's own motives and purity of mind into question. The system of social credit, credibility, and authority was against her. As
Lyndall Gordon points out, Woolf
could not hope to combat the impeccable social front that George represented. ... His mastery as effective head of the family, his age (he was thirty­six, his sister twenty), her
dependence (he had a thousand pounds a year, she fifty) backed his overtures. (119)

Once George's behavior became known, 4 no serious connection was made by others between the abuse and Woolf's nervous breakdowns or sexual troubles, no
action was taken against George, nor did Woolf find much support later in life for her interpretation of George's behavior as part of the patriarchal organization of the
family and society.5 George's behavior was not interrogated as indicative of mental dysfunction or criminal tendencies. Rather, Woolf was perceived by her doctors
and her family as congenitally prone to insanity and/or as hysterical and frigid.6 For example, even Woolf's sister Vanessa, appealed to for advice after Virginia and
Leonard's honeymoon in 1912, called her frigid (Gordon 152). The extent to which sexual abuse was not taken seriously by Woolf's family and doctors is indicated by
the decision, in 1913, to send Woolf

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 87

to George Duckworth's country house to recuperate from a breakdown and suicide attempt.
Woolf could not find much support in the social or political world beyond her family, either. The late nineteenth­ and early twentieth­century women's movement in
Britain did address sexual violence including stranger rape, marital rape, and child sexual abuse and incest, analyzing them as part of the system of male power over
women and advocating legislative as well as social solutions. Women's rights advocates, however, were under concerted attack by the teens and twenties as anti­sex,
puritanical, frigid, and neurotic (Jeffreys, The Spinster and Her Enemies). Freud and the sexologists were in the ascendancy in medicine and psychology. Their work
variously tends to trivialize or deny rape and sexual abuse, to define normal, mature femininity as participation in conventional heterosexuality, and to label female
celibacy as neurosis. Their ideas were being taken up by intellectuals, many social reformers, and even some workers in the women's movement. The Woolfs' own
Hogarth Press published the English editions of Freud's work, translated by their friend, James Strachey.
Such a situation of gender inequality in all forms of power and authority and such a system of sexual meanings and definitions of normality could only cultivate indirect
modes of writing about incest, what Woolf called her "side­long approach" ("A Sketch" 150). Yet she also says that "on the other hand, the surface manner allows
one, as I have found, to slip in things that would be inaudible if one marched straight up and spoke out loud" (150).
Woolf's early mock­journalistic sketch, "Terrible Tragedy in A Duckpond, by One of the Drowned" (1899, 1904), may very well be her first attempt to communicate
her incest experiences. This overtly humorous piece uses drowning as a metaphor for incest and "duckweed" as code for "Duckworth," according to Louise DeSalvo's
analysis (255–261). Originally written in Woolf's private journal, and later sent to her cousin, Emma Vaughan, with instructions to "read my work carefully—not
missing my peculiar words" (Letters I 28), "Terrible Tragedy'' marks the beginning of Woolf's use of humor and coding to tell but simultaneously cover up her incest
story.
Woolf's earliest memoir, "Reminiscences," and her first novel, The Voyage Out, continue these strategies of indirection. Woolf wrote "Reminiscences" in 1907–08, at
the same time that she was in the early stages of her first novel, The Voyage Out (1915). As she completed them, she sent chapters of both to her brother­in­law,
Clive Bell, who, while encouraging her writing, criticized her for her "prejudice against men" and was not receptive to her feminist insights (Letters I 383). Such an
audience would not be conducive to the kind of full reconstruction of her incest story that therapists such as Herman or Bass and Davis call for. Woolf's letters at the
time indicate that she was also concerned about the possible reception of her novel upon publication, admitting

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 88

to Clive, for example, that it was difficult "to ignore the opinion of one's probable readers" (Letters I 383).
"Reminiscences," written for Vanessa's son, Julian, and unfinished, concentrates almost entirely on Woolf's mother and older half­sister and on Vanessa in its
recounting of family history. However, near the end, it spends a long, two­page paragraph discussing George's behavior towards Virginia and Vanessa after their
mother's death, when, Woolf says, "some restraint seemed to burst" (57). He seemed "immaculate'' in character, and the Stephen children were taught so to think: "he
showed himself so sad, so affectionate, so boundlessly unselfish in his plans, that the voices of all women cried aloud in his praise, and men were touched by his
modest virtues" (57). But, says Woolf, such good­natured qualities were complicated in George by "a racing sea of emotions" and "violent gusts of passion." She
attempts to explain George's character and actions: "nature, we may suppose, had supplied him with abundant animal vigour, but she had neglected to set an efficient
brain in control of it" (58). The result was that "under the name of unselfishness he allowed himself to commit acts which a cleverer man would have called tyrannical;
and, profoundly believing in the purity of his love, behaved little better than a brute" (58). This is all that Woolf allows herself to write at this time, but the connotations,
particularly the Victorian connotations, of the words and phrases she uses—violent passion, animal vigour, the need of reason to control it, tyranny, purity of love vs.
brutishness—hint at sexual indiscretion and coercion.
This early memoir of George concentrates on analyzing and explaining his character as a problem of human nature. Woolf also defends Virginia and Vanessa's early
idealization of him and confusion over whether to trust him (common reactions of incest victims) as perfectly understandable given his standing in their social world
(57). Thus, even in this short, early autobiographical fragment Woolf steers away from some of the pitfalls of the confessional mode, insisting on analyzing the
perpetrator's behavior as the problem and placing the victims' silence in a context that explains it as a factor of social authority. By so doing she is also constructing her
narrative voice as an authority on the family history, speculating about causes and effects, and avoiding presenting her adolescent self as a "case" to be analyzed or
diagnosed by an expert other.
Woolf's first novel, The Voyage Out, is her first major, public articulation of her experience as a patriarchal daughter and an incest victim; her goal was to represent "a
view of one's own" and "to give voice to some of the perplexities of her sex" (Letters I 383). 7 It is also her novel that concentrates most fully on a female protagonist
who has suffered sexual abuse and on the effects this has on her development. The Voyage Out is about the struggle of Rachel Vinrace (a young middle­class British
woman like Virginia Stephen) to become a knowledgeable, competent, adult person, and her defeat by the sociosexual forces of British society. After becoming
engaged, Rachel dies of a

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 89

"fever;" that is, she dies of the heated (i.e. sexual) violence against women that marks her society.
Writing The Voyage Out inevitably raised Woolf's anxieties about her "probable readers." Symptomatic of her anxieties about publication is the extraordinary extent
to which she revised and redrafted this novel. Louise DeSalvo's study of the manuscripts suggests that "no fewer than seven drafts of the novel once existed, but there
may have been as many as eleven or twelve" (Virginia Woolf's First Voyage 9). DeSalvo also documents that, as Woolf revised earlier drafts with an eye towards
publication, she consistently cut or made more obscure material concerning sexual abuse and feminist critique as well as autobiographical material. These concerns are
left in the text as trace elements, in a sense, discernible if one pays attention to dreams, literary allusion, imagery, and Woolf's personal code words such as duckweed.
In The Voyage Out, incest is hinted at in the descriptions of the protagonist Rachel Vinrace's father and represented at a remove and by synecdoche by Mr.
Dalloway's forced kiss. For example, Rachel's Aunt Helen suspects Willoughby Vinrace of "nameless atrocities with regard to his daughter" (24). And Willoughby's
plans for Rachel's future reveal his desire to educate her to be his spouse­like companion; he tells Helen he wants Rachel to become his hostess and housekeeper.
What is most insistently represented in the novel, however, is the alienated and split consciousness of Rachel and her consequent life­threatening inability to negotiate
adult society and coming­of­age, particularly engagement and marriage. The novel makes clear that Rachel consistently moves through life in a distanced, dissociated
state reminiscent of Woolf's cottonwool of non­being. For example, she had learned from her family not to feel or express intense emotions (36). The result is that
Rachel feels disconnected from others, thinking "let these odd men and women—her aunts, the Hunts, Ridley, Helen, Mr. Pepper, and the rest—be symbols ...
symbols of age, of youth, of motherhood, of learning, and beautiful often as people upon the stage are beautiful. It appeared that nobody ever said a thing they meant,
or ever talked of a feeling they felt" (37). The novel also represents some of the immediate effects of abuse. After Mr. Dalloway grabs and kisses Rachel,
her head was cold, her knees shaking, and the physical pain of the emotion was so great that she could only keep herself moving above the great leaps of her heart. She leant
upon the rail of the ship, and gradually ceased to feel, for a chill of body and mind crept over her. (76)

Rachel's reaction to the pain of violation is the typical reaction of victims of sexual abuse, who in order to survive numb themselves to what is happening. Thus Woolf
implies a link between an experience of abuse and the detached fog in which Rachel tends to live.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 90

The link between the cause (sexual abuse) and the consequences (Rachel's illness, nightmares and hallucination, inability to compose her life) is further suggested
through imagery, coding and allusion. The night after Dalloway's "kiss," Rachel's fear and pain return to her in her dreams:
She dreamt that she was walking down a long tunnel. ... [which] opened and became a vault; she found herself trapped in it, bricks meeting her wherever she turned, along with a
little deformed man. ... His face was pitted and like the face of an animal. ... Still and cold as death she lay, not daring to move. (77)

Instigated by Dalloway's violation, this dream expresses the horror and feeling of entrapment sexual abuse creates and the threat to survival it represents. Rachel
freezes into terrified immobility, just as she numbs herself to her anguish after Dalloway kisses her. The "vault" suggests a burial vault, and indeed, Rachel lies "still and
cold as death," while the bricks suggest the typical brick middle­class London home. Woolf implies that the family home can become a place of captivity for girls in
which sexual violation is a terrifying threat to survival.
The image of men with animal­like faces surfaces again in The Voyage Out through allusion. Rachel's fatal "fever" comes upon her while the invocation to Sabrina, the
virgin goddess of the river in Milton's Comus: A Mask, is read aloud, significantly, by her fiancé, Terence Hewet. Milton describes Comus as a male Circe who
tempts travellers through his forest to drink from his "Crystal Glass," upon which their faces change "into some brutish form of Wolf, or Bear,/Or ounce, or Tiger, Hog,
or bearded Goat" (ll. 71–72), and they become part of his rowdy and lascivious band of followers. The story of Comus centers on Comus's attempt to rape The Lady
lost in his forest. Woolf's use of an allusion to Comus to introduce Rachel's fever might suggest to the general reader a link between sexual violence, Rachel's
engagement, and Rachel's illness. The goddess Sabrina saves The Lady from Comus; Terence's reading of the invocation to Sabrina seems to invoke Rachel's fever,
which "saves" her from her engagement and upcoming marriage. But this allusion also allows Woolf to use her private code about George Duckworth. The beast­
faced men of Comus's band not only recall the animal­faced man of Rachel's nightmare but also Woolf's description of George in her memoirs: ''though he had the
curls of a God and the ears of a faun, he had unmistakenly the eyes of a pig." Again, "his face was sallow and scored with innumerable wrinkles, for his skin was as
loose and flexible as a pug dog's" ("22 Hyde Park Gate" 166, 172). Woolf publicly, in code, links incest and Rachel's death, compares herself to Rachel, and suggests
a connection between the sexual entrapment of girls in the family house and Rachel's impending marriage: they are both part of a patriarchal sexual system that
threatens the survival and well­being of women.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 91

That Woolf resurrects the metaphor of drowning and her code word "duckweed" in this novel as well underscores the validity of this reading. In Rachel's hallucinations
during her fatal illness, she feels herself to be drowning in a pool of "sticky," semen­like water (340–341). Earlier in the novel, Mr. Dalloway had recounted a
conversation in which the captain of the Mauritania had said that the danger he most feared for his ship was "'sedgius aquatici,' ... which I take to be a kind of duck­
weed" (42). The ship of Rachel's life has encountered in its maiden voyage out the danger most to be feared. Rachel, like Virginia Stephen, is "One of the Drowned,"
drowning in duckweed. Rachel's fate indicates the extremity of Woolf's pain and fear about sexual abuse and her knowledge that it produces serious obstacles to the
achievement of a productive adult life. The Voyage Out is, in a way, a rewriting of ''Terrible Tragedy in a Duckpond," and enlarges upon its strategy of coding.
While "Reminiscences" hints vaguely that George Duckworth has done something terrible and sexual to his sisters, in her first novel Woolf represents the emotional
experience of incest and some of its psychological consequences through Rachel. Woolf thus splits autobiographical event and emotional content between the memoir
and the fiction. Coding and splitting event and affect allow her to both tell and hide her story, to obey "the twin imperatives of truth­telling and secrecy." In this sense,
these writing strategies can be seen as a replication of the psychological symptoms of trauma, as "hysterical" writing. But these strategies also allow her to avoid
exposing her own emotions and psyche to the diagnosis of "the confessional" and instead to become the "expert interpreter" herself through her narrator who, by
juxtaposition and comment, proposes an analysis of the sexual politics of Rachel's life.
Woolf's next memoir, "22 Hyde Park Gate," written years later in 1920 or early 1921, is the first in which she clearly states that George Duckworth sexually abused
her, and in this way marks an important break with the earlier memoir. As in "Reminiscences," however, Woolf's own feelings about the abuse and interpretation of its
significance for her own life do not come to the fore. The focus is on George's social ambitions, intense and muddled emotions, and plans for his sisters' social
triumphs, again implying that he and his actions are the "problem case" to analyze, not Woolf herself. "22 Hyde Park Gate" concludes with a description of Virginia's
first evening out to dinner and the theatre with George, ending with him tiptoeing into her room, flinging himself on her bed, and taking her "in his arms" (177). The final
sentence ironically juxtaposes George's public image and private behavior: "Yes, the old ladies of Kensington and Belgravia never knew that George Duckworth was
not only father and mother, brother and sister to those poor Stephen girls; he was their lover also" (177).
Woolf presented this piece to the Bloomsbury Memoir Club, a group of friends committed to openness and truth­telling, but also a group composed

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 92

mostly of men, several of whom, such as Desmond MacCarthy, Woolf had already had conflicts with over women's issues. This would be an audience of "advanced"
but not feminist views, open to talk about sex but not sympathetic to analyses of sexual politics nor necessarily a safe audience to whom to disclose the fear and pain
of violation. Accordingly, "Reminiscences" resurrects "Terrible Tragedy's" strategy of deflecting attention through humor. The tone of the piece is sarcastic, ironic,
witty. This approach allows her coolly to spear George Duckworth with her wit like an entomologist pinning a bug to a card, labelling him as a snob and a Victorian
throwback as well as incredibly self­ignorant:
His talk was all of ivory buttons that the coachmen of Cabinet Ministers wear in their coats; of having the entree at Court; of baronies descending in the female line. ... His secret
dreams as he sat in the red leather chair ... were all of marrying a wife with diamonds, and having a coachman with a button, and having the entree at Court. But the danger was that
his dreams were secret even to himself. (169)

The few times Woolf alludes to what it felt like to be George Duckworth's sister, she uses slightly melodramatic language, conveying a sense of how overwhelming it
was but also making light of it. For example, "as [George's] passions increased and his desires became more vehement ... one felt like an unfortunate minnow shut up
in the same tank with an unwieldy and turbulent whale" (169).
A year later, for the same audience, she wrote "Old Bloomsbury," which mainly concerns the beginning of the Bloomsbury Group and a new life after her father's
death. At the beginning of the piece, though, she brings her audience back to the end of her previous memoir, and indicates by a simple change in verb tense—
would/did her audience catch it?—that George's abuse was not a single event but habitual:
it was long past midnight that I got into bed and sat reading a page or two of Marius the Epicurean for which I had then a passion. There would be a tap at the door; the light
would be turned out and George would fling himself on my bed, cuddling and kissing and otherwise embracing me. (182)

She also maintains that her breakdown after her father's death was "not unnaturally the result of all these emotions and complications" of the Stephen family life (183),
suggesting an environmental cause of her "madness" and a link to George, among other sources, rather than simply a congenital, constitutional illness as her family liked
to believe.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 93

In the twenties and thirties, Woolf represented the emotional content of her experiences through her fiction, rather than her memoirs, continuing the early pattern of
splitting affect from the overt autobiographical writing and placing it in the novels. The novels, her public texts, represent the emotions of the experience of abuse often
without explicitly tying those emotions to the events or by displacing them to other kinds of people or to other, though often similar, events. In Mrs. Dalloway (1925),
for example, Septimus Smith, a veteran of World War I, experiences dissociation, flashbacks, hallucinations, emotional numbing, alienation from other people, and a
despairing lack of trust in social order or human nature. He encounters a medical profession that perceives him as a threat to the "normal" order, diagnoses him as
morally cowardly and hysterical, and prescribes a rest cure at an asylum. To escape this normalizing regime, Septimus commits suicide by jumping from his window.
Through this shell shock victim, Woolf represents many of the symptoms of sexual abuse victims, as well as their treatment by the medical establishment of her day.
She thus anticipates Judith Herman's breakthrough: "the hysteria of women and the combat neurosis of men are one" (Herman 32). What men experience at war,
women experience at home, in daily life.
In To the Lighthouse (1927), Woolf describes some aspects of the state of mind of an abuse survivor, but without tying them to any specific event. Cam Ramsay,
sailing to the lighthouse with her father and her brother, finds herself painfully struggling with love, loyalty and anger for her father and her brother. Her mind gravitates
towards images of underwater worlds or the faraway shore, seeking a state of no feeling: "They have no suffering there, she thought;" "They don't feel a thing there,
Cam thought" (253, 272). Her mind, "numbed and shrouded" (272), flirts with images of death on land and underwater. She imagines sea changes to mind and body
under the waves, and imagines that people on the faraway shore are peaceful, "free to come and go like ghosts" (253).
As a final example, Rose Pargiter, of The Years (1937), experiences a kind of sexual assault as a little girl; a man exposes himself to her on the street between her
home and the corner store. In adulthood, Rose tells her sister and brother that she tried to commit suicide by slitting her wrists after this event when no one would
listen to her tale about it. DeSalvo points out that "Rose recalls it [the assault] throughout her life as the moment that has shaped her very being. It has caused her to
become a committed, political activist, a suffragist, who goes on hunger strike" (Virginia Woolf 185).
"A Sketch of the Past" is Woolf's final attempt to shape her life story. Begun as a diversion from her book projects at the time, the audience was unclear. Perhaps
eventually it would be revised into something shaped, artistic, something for others, she suggests, but the draft that survives and is published in Moments of Being is a
first draft that she wrote for herself. It is thus not

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 94

surprising that "A Sketch" is the most open, continuous, connected, and political of her memoirs. In this piece, Woolf speculates about the functions of writing in her
life, about the effect of Gerald's abuse of her at age six on her personality and development, and places her family relations squarely in a gendered political and
historical context. Although this memoir does not go into detail about Gerald's abuse and does not directly discuss George's sexual behavior to her, Woolf
concentrates much more fully on her feelings and the effects of family members and events on her as a developing person than she does in her earlier memoirs. She
speculates, for example, that Gerald's abuse may help to explain why she was "ashamed or afraid of my own body" (68) and continues to feel fear and anxiety about
her appearance and clothes. In this memoir, as well, Woolf most clearly and completely combines autobiographical detail and psychological and social analysis. She
never stays in solely an autobiographical confessional mode; she interprets, sets in familial, historical, and social context. By so doing, she obviates the split between
theory and experience, mind and body, and the invalidation of the survivor as witness and theorist that Alcoff and Gray analyze as one of the dangers of the
confessional. By taking on and combining the roles of witness, analyst, and historian, Woolf models building theory upon experience and authorizes herself as an
interpreter of the history and politics of the family.
In Woolf's memoirs, one can see a progression from vagueness and evasion to outspokenness and, in "A Sketch," to an explicit analysis of where the incidents of
abuse fit in her personal development, in the politics of her family, and how these politics reflected Victorian social structures and gender roles. Woolf moves towards
greater clarity and detail in her telling of her story and towards the kind of continuity of life story and reflection on the meanings of the events that constitute the
recovery process. But it is "A Sketch of the Past," the piece that most fully "puts the severed parts together," for which Woolf could not imagine, or find, an audience.
She was very much alone with her experiences of incest and her political analysis of them, especially by 1940–41, as the negative responses of her friends and family
to her most overt political critique of the patriarchal family, Three Guineas (1939), showed her. This reality could only have contributed to Woolf's growing sense of
isolation caused by the death of friends and by World War II, a sense of being "adrift" that Toni A. H. McNaron argues was central to Woolf's decision to commit
suicide in 1941 (''Echoes").
IV: Conclusion
The example of Virginia Woolf suggests that writing can be a tool for self­construction and for reconnection to past and future and to other people,

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 95

but that writing in itself is not enough. Audience and social context are crucial. The full potential of writing as a means of healing can only be fulfilled in the context of a
supportive and responsive community and feminist renaming and rethinking of sexual abuse and its causes and consequences.
Through writing, Woolf remembers and represents events and feelings, moves away from a split sense of self, develops a more integrated, continuous sense of self in
time and social context, places sexual abuse in childhood and adolescence in an ongoing narrative which explains their effects on psychological development, distances
herself from and criticizes the perpetrators, and places what happened to her in the context of a feminist analysis of family and social gender politics. But her telling of
her story remains split and incomplete. Events are not completely told nor told in a continuous narrative; different memoirs present parts of the story. Events and
feelings are often hinted at or told in code or through allusion in the fiction and the memoirs. Direct or clear portrayal and analysis of sexual abuse in the fiction is often
censored between draft and publication. Finally, affect is often split from the narration of her own story and put in the fiction, where it may be attached to characters or
events analogous or similar to herself and her experiences but still disguised.
Thus, Woolf's strategy for creating a safe space to communicate publicly about sexual abuse is double­edged in its effects. On the one hand, Woolf's use of coding
and indirection allows her to articulate experiences and imply political analyses of incest which she apparently did not feel safe in talking about more explicitly,
especially early in her career and for a public audience. This indirection also allows the reader who is not open to such material to pass it by while the reader who is
searching for such material will more easily perceive it. She thus creates a safe space both for herself and for the reader. Woolf's splitting of life event and emotional
experience between memoir and fiction allows her to avoid the dangers of the confessional and to authorize herself as theorist of her own experience.
On the other hand, the space so created may be restricting for several reasons. Her strategy entails some self­censorship. She creates her "safe space" at the cost of
clarity, of an outspoken naming of the crime and the perpetrator, and an explicit political analysis of their functions in maintaining the social status quo. Her strategy
may make it easier for many readers to continue to deny that such material even exists in her life or writing. Finally, one of the symptoms of incest is an existential
shame and guilt, especially about one's body. This shame and guilt must be among the sources of Woolf's evasion and self­silencing about bodily and especially sexual
matters.
The indirection, coding, and splitting of Woolf's public writing is not only a strategy for creating safe space for self­expression and political analysis but also a symptom
of the incestuous damage done to her. Woolf's accomplishments through writing should not be underestimated; she achieved an extraordinarily

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 96

productive life, productive of many life­long friendships and of an enormous output of powerful writing in a wide variety of genres. However, writing functioned
paradoxically in Woolf's life as both safe space and danger zone and Woolf's writing strategies constitute both a symptom of incestuous abuse and a means for
(partially) healing. Knowledge of the pain and the costs behind Woolf's achievements can only increase our appreciation of them.
Notes
1. The title of Joanne S. Frye's Living Stories, Telling Lives encapsulates this relationship wonderfully.
2. In "A Sketch," Woolf reports an incident of abuse by her stepbrother Gerald Duckworth when she was about six (around 1888). We also know of ongoing abuse
from George Duckworth in her adolescence, possibly beginning after her mother's death in 1895, certainly after her stepsister Stella's death in 1897, and continuing at
least until sometime during her father's fatal illness in 1903–04.
3. In this article, I depend on knowledge about the effects of incest and other forms of sexual abuse and the process of recovery provided by a number of recent
studies: Ellen Bass and Laura Davis, The Courage to Heal; Judith Herman with Lisa Hirschman, Father­Daughter Incest; Judith Herman, Trauma and Recovery;
Patricia Love, The Emotional Incest Syndrome; Toni A. H. McNaron and Yarrow Morgan, Voices in the Night; Alice Miller, The Drama of the Gifted Child
and Thou Shalt Not Be Aware; Florence Rush, The Best­Kept Secret; Diana E. H. Russell, The Secret Trauma.
4. Vanessa seems to have told Virginia's physician, Dr. Savage, about George's sexual abuse of Virginia during Virginia's mental illness of 1904–5, after her father's
death. How soon anyone else was informed is hard to say. Woolf herself told Janet Case in 1911, and the Bloomsbury Memoir Club in 1920–21.
5. This minimizing of, or simple lack of analysis of, the seriousness and consequences of the sexual abuse Woolf suffered is repeated by many of her biographers,
including Bell and Gordon, even though, as indicated above, they make clear its egregious nature and Woolf's powerlessness in her familial and social context. Louise
DeSalvo's Virginia Woolf fills in this gap, and urges reconsideration of Woolf's "madness."
6. The medical treatment Woolf received indicates the extent to which medical theory and practice was entrenched in conventional gender ideology and that her
doctors did not consider George's behavior as a possible cause of her illness. From Woolf's first breakdown in 1895 throughout her life, the prescriptions of her
doctors included extreme restrictions on and/or complete cessation of reading and writing. Consider what this would mean given Woolf's dependence on writing to
combat the symptoms of post­traumatic stress disorder. The rest cures she was made to endure in her breakdown of 1910 and at subsequent periods replicated the
powerlessness, silencing, and isolation experienced during abuse, as well as the submission to a male

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 97

authority (in this case, the doctor). For history and analysis of the sexual politics of the rest cure as developed by the American physician S. Weir Mitchell, see
Charlotte Perkins Gilman's The Yellow Wallpaper and Barbara Ehrenreich and Deirdre English, For Her Own Good. For more analysis of Woolf's illness and the
politics of medicine, see Poole, Trombley, DeSalvo, Caramagno.
7. For a fuller discussion of my arguments about sexual abuse in The Voyage Out, see "'My Boldness Terrifies Me': Sexual Abuse and Female Subjectivity in The
Voyage Out."
Works Cited
Alcoff, Linda, and Laura Gray. "Survivor Discourse: Transgression or Recuperation?" Signs 18.2 (Winter 1993): 260–290.
Apgar, Sonia. "Fighting Back on Paper and in Real Life." This volume.
Bass, Ellen, and Laura Davis. The Courage to Heal: A Guide to Women Survivors of Child Sexual Abuse. New York: Harper and Row, 1988.
Bell, Quentin. Virginia Woolf: A Biography. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1982.
Brodkey, Linda. "Modernism and the Scene(s) of Writing." College English 49.4 (1987): 396–418.
Caramagno, Thomas C. The Flight of the Mind: Virginia Woolf's Art and Manic­Depressive Illness. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1992.
DeSalvo, Louise. Virginia Woolf: The Impact of Childhood Sexual Abuse on Her Life and Work. Boston: Beacon, 1989.
DeSalvo, Louise. Virginia Woolf's First Voyage: A Novel in the Making. Totowa, NJ: Rowman and Littlefield, 1980.
Gordon, Lyndall. Virginia Woolf: A Writer's Life. New York: W. W. Norton, 1984, 1993.
Ehrenreich, Barbara, and Deirdre English. For Her Own Good: 150 Years of the Experts' Advice to Women. Garden City, NY: Anchor/Doubleday, 1978.
Herman, Judith. Trauma and Recovery: The Aftermath of Violence—From Domestic Abuse to Political Terror. New York: Basic Books, 1992.
Herman, Judith, with Lisa Hirschman. Father­Daughter Incest. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1981.
Jeffreys, Sheila. The Spinster and Her Enemies: Feminism and Sexuality 1880–1930. London and Boston: Pandora, 1985.
Love, Patricia. The Emotional Incest Syndrome: What to Do When a Parent's Love Rules Your Life. New York: Bantam, 1990.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 98

McNaron, Toni A. H. "Echoes of Virginia Woolf." Women's Studies International Forum 6.5 (1983): 501–507.
McNaron, Toni A. H. "The Uneasy Solace of Art: The Impact of Sexual Abuse on Woolf's Aesthetic." Women's Studies International Forum 15.2 (1992): 251–
266.
McNaron, Toni A. H., and Yarrow Morgan, eds. Voices in the Night: Women Speaking About Incest. Pittsburgh and San Francisco: Cleis Press, 1982.
Miller, Alice. The Drama of the Gifted Child: How Narcissistic Parents Form and Deform the Emotional Lives of Their Talented Children. Trans. Ruth
Ward. New York: Basic Books, 1981.
Miller, Alice. Thou Shalt Not Be Aware: Society's Betrayal of the Child. Trans. Hildegarde and Hunter Hannum. New York: New American, 1984.
Milton, John. Comus: A Mask. Complete Poems and Prose. Ed. Merritt Y. Hughes. Indianapolis: Bobbs­Merrill, 1957. 86–114.
Poole, Roger. The Unknown Virginia Woolf. 1978. Atlantic Highlands, NJ: Humanities, 1982.
Rush, Florence. The Best­Kept Secret: Sexual Abuse of Children. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice­Hall, 1980.
Russell, Diana E. H. The Secret Trauma: Incest in the Lives of Girls and Women. New York: Basic Books, 1986.
Schulkind, Jeanne, ed. Moments of Being. 2nd edition. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1985.
Swanson, Diana L. "'My Boldness Terrifies Me': Sexual Abuse and Female Subjectivity in The Voyage Out." Twentieth Century Literature (forthcoming).
Trombley, Stephen. All That Summer She Was Mad: Virginia Woolf: Female Victim of Male Medicine. New York: Continuum, 1981.
Woolf, Virginia. "22 Hyde Park Gate." Moments of Being. Ed. Jeanne Schulkind. 2nd edition. 162–177.
Woolf, Virginia. The Diary of Virginia Woolf. 5 vols. Ed. Anne Olivier Bell. Intro. by Quentin Bell. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1977.
Woolf, Virginia. The Letters of Virginia Woolf. 6 vols. Eds. Nigel Nicolson and Joanne Trautmann. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1975–1980.
Woolf, Virginia. A Passionate Apprentice: The Early Journals, 1897–1909. Ed. Mitchell A. Leaska. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1990.
Woolf, Virginia. "Professions for Women." The Death of the Moth and Other Essays. 1942. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1970. 235–242.
Woolf, Virginia. "Reminiscences." Moments of Being. Ed. Jeanne Schulkind. 2nd edition.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:35 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Copyright 1998. State University of New York Press.
All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher,
except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.

Page 99

Woolf, Virginia. "A Sketch of the Past." Moments of Being. Ed. Jeanne Schulkind. 2nd edition 61–159.
Woolf, Virginia. The Voyage Out. 1915. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1948.
Woolf, Virginia. A Writer's Diary. 1953. Ed. Leonard Woolf. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1982.

EBSCO Publishing : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES
AN: 7921 ; Kuribayashi, Tomoko, Tharp, Julie Ann.; Creating Safe Space : Violence and Women's Writing
Account: undeloan.main.ehost

Page 101

"One Need not be a Chamber—to be Haunted": Emily Dickinson's Haunted Space
Mary Jo Dondlinger
Emily Dickinson produced an imposing quantity of poems in the early 1860s, a period of her life which biographers, such as Mabel Loomis Todd, Martha Dickinson
Bianchi, and Richard Sewall, agree was ridden with emotional agony and grief. Sewall describes the period as "crucial, a time of extraordinary stress and inner
turmoil" (465). Millicent Todd Bingham writes, "All that is known points to a crisis in the early 1860s. The inner turmoil which beset her throughout her life was
intensified at that time" (417). The enormous amount of artistic expression, over three hundred and sixty poems in one year, was a means of dealing with and
overcoming this anguished period of her life. Emily Dickinson, herself, suggested that her writing assuaged her pain when she wrote of her poetry to T. W. Higginson,
"I felt a palsy, here—the Verses just relieve" (Selected Letters 174). She felt that writing possessed healing power; it was therapeutic. Despite Dickinson's assertions
and universal agreement that this was a "crisis'' period, various biographical accounts of the period are not satisfying primarily because they fail to account for the
sexual explicitness of such poems as "A Bee his burnished Carriage" (1339) and the violence in such poems as "Rearrange a 'Wife's' affection! (1737). The sexual
references in these poems are misinterpreted as affectionate and loving; the violence is simply ignored. 1 Another explanation, which accounts for such allusions, is that
Emily Dickinson was sexually abused and wrote as a means of creating safe space.
I contend that Emily Dickinson was a survivor of a sexual abuse, specifically incest, and like many sexually victimized women, used writing as a means of
reconstructing a sense of safety. I support this argument first by illustrating how Dickinson, given her family background, was at high risk for sexual victimization. I will
then offer an interpretative reading of six poems, labelled the "Wife" poems, which suggest that Dickinson was a victim of father­daughter incest. Finally, I will show
how Dickinson's perception of home,

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 102

normally the quintessential "safe space," as represented in her poetry, is threatening. Yet through this poetry, Dickinson constructs alternative safe spaces, such as the
heart, soul, mind, and even the grave.
I would like to stress that my intent is only to speculate upon a provocative explanation of the cause of Emily Dickinson's suffering. Cultural restrictions have prevented
this type of supposition in the past and it has only recently been feasible, because of contemporary feminist criticism, to entertain the possibility that Dickinson's
suffering resulted from sexual victimization. Entertaining a possibility is not synonymous with providing a definitive interpretation of Dickinson's entire canon, nor is such
my intent. My design is simply to suggest a biographical interpretation of Dickinson's "crisis" which accounts for the inadequacies of previous interpretations.
Many circumstances in Dickinson's family background indicate that she was at a high risk for sexual victimization. Studies on sexual victimization outline factors which
are conducive to sexual abuse. While these factors describe both the social conditions and family backgrounds of victims, the findings concerning the social factors are
ambiguous and inconclusive. The family structures that encourage sexual abuse, however, are consistent in many studies. 2 The main factors, according to David
Finkelhor, are marital conflict or disruption, absence or inability of the mother, and the ordinal position of siblings (118–130). Each one of these factors applies to
Emily Dickinson's family background.3
Marital conflict refers not only to parents fighting excessively; marital disruption is the absence of either parent for extended periods of time or permanently. Conflict
and disruption seem to be factors because children are less supervised and more vulnerable to sexual advances. They may also receive contradictory messages about
sex and what is appropriate, making them less able to discern, refuse, and report inappropriate behavior (Finkelhor 119).
While there are reports of husband and wife quarrels in various Dickinson biographies, there is no reason to believe it was excessive. It is normal for couples to
disagree occasionally. There is evidence, however, that Edward and Emily Dickinson's marriage was disrupted. Edward was frequently out of town for extended
periods of time, sometimes for years. He spent four years in Washington as a representative to the U.S. Congress. His legal practice took him away from home as
well. Emily Norcross spent much time away from the home seeking treatment for illness. When she was at home, she was bedridden and prone to despondency.
These periods of withdrawal and depression, which began shortly after her marriage to Edward Dickinson, continued until her death. Because the marriage was
disrupted in this way, a disintegration of affection and communication between parents and a decrease in supervision of the children is likely.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 103

The absence or inability of a mother is another risk factor. According to Finkelhor, one theory suggests that she abdicates her maternal responsibilities. Another
proposes that she tries to exchange roles with her daughter. Still another sees the weak or absent mother as unable to protect her daughter from abuse or fails to
report the abuse if she discovers it (120). Whatever the reason, the statistical evidence that absent or ineffectual mothers are a factor is conclusive. Three times as
many girls with absent or passive mothers were reportedly victimized than those whose mothers were present on a regular basis (125).
Emily Norcross Dickinson's repeated absence from the home for treatment of illness and her debilitation when in residence is well documented. When she was not
bedridden, she was often depressed and withdrawn. From a very young age, both Emily and Lavinia had to manage the household and care for their mother. Emily's
comment in a letter that she "never had a mother" is often quoted and speculated upon. Although an exaggeration on Dickinson's part, the statement indicates a
perception of her mother's effectuality. She seems to have recognized and resented her mother's disability.
The ordinal position of siblings is another factor in father­daughter incest, with the oldest daughter receiving the highest probability of abuse. While the ordinal position
of a daughter is significant for victimization in general, it is a decisive factor in father­daughter incest. Finkelhor writes, "It has been found that victims of father­daughter
incest are almost always the oldest daughters" (129). Emily Dickinson was the oldest daughter in the Dickinson family. If Edward Dickinson had any inclination toward
incest, his daughter Emily would have been the victim.
The most powerful support for the contention that Dickinson was a victim of sexual abuse, particularly incest, lies in an interpretation of the "Wife" poems. The "Wife"
poems are a group of six poems, in which Dickinson seems to imagine that she is married by calling herself a wife. These poems are 199 "I'm 'wife'—I've finished
that—," 461 "A Wife—at Daybreak I shall be—,'' 463 "I live with Him—I see His face—," 732 "She rose to His Requirement," 1072 "Title divine—is mine!", and
1737 "Rearrange a 'Wife's' affection!" The significance of these poems is that in trying to interpret what Emily Dickinson may have meant by the word "wife," the
reader is forced to reevaluate Emily Dickinson's relationship with her father. In her biography, Barbara Antonina Clarke Mossberg writes:
It is readily apparent to the reader of both the poetry and the letters [of Dickinson] that the father is the central—if not the only—figure in Dickinson's thought. Consequently,
Edward Dickinson is one of the most notorious fathers in literary history, his importance an issue which every biographer has had to resolve. (68)

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 104

Dickinson's relationship with her father figures prominently in these six poems. This analysis will begin by outlining the various characteristics of a "wife" and the
possible ways in which Dickinson might have been using the term. The characteristics and usage can then be compared with the "wife" that Dickinson depicts in the
poems.
The word "wife," which currently refers to "a married woman," archaically referred to any woman, married or unmarried. The word "woman" is derived etymologically
from the word ''wife." While "wife" did not always possess the specificity of the modern meaning, it is most probable that Emily Dickinson was referring to this
definition of wife; namely, a married woman. Because she was unmarried herself, she likely used the word to connote some aspect of "womanhood" closely associated
with the qualities and experience of a wife.
The term "wife" has implications metonymically associated with its literal definition, a married woman. For example, a married woman can be characterized as sharing
a home with a man. A woman gains a measure of social status upon marrying, as marriage is perceived as a rite of passage. This status carries a measure of social
obligation and responsibility. Historically, marriage placed a woman and her assets under the patriarchal control of her husband. A married woman also was
understood to have sexual experience, which led to the conception and raising of children. Sharing a home, patriarchal control, social status and responsibility, sexual
experience, and child­rearing are experiential aspects of a "wife," and a woman possessing any one of these characteristics might justifiably be termed a "wife."
Dickinson might have adopted the perspective of a "wife" for a number of reasons. She may have been pretending to be married or imagining what marriage would be
like. It is also possible that the "wife" poems may relay attitudes about marriage or wifehood that she observed in other married women such as her mother or her
sister­in­law, Susan. Another conceivable explanation is that her referent may not be a literal "wife" but is a metaphor for another relationship to which the
husband/wife relationship bears much similarity. In this sense, the "wife" in the poems might be one not literally "married," but who possesses several of the
characteristics previously defined.
Dickinson may have been merely fantasizing herself a wife in these ambiguous poems. Marriage was an important social distinction, although unmarried women were
not social outcasts. However, even today, when the importance and distinction placed upon marriage is decreasing, young girls fantasize about weddings and getting
married. It would not be unusual, then, in a society where marriage did have greater prestige, for young girls to engage in the same fantasies and for Emily Dickinson to
fantasize about marriage or even call herself a wife in a few poems and letters. Nevertheless, her girlhood letters do not express such fantasies. Rather, she seems to
express such profuse

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 105
4

affection for her girlfriends that she leaves no room in them for the anticipation of a future husband. Nor does she seem to aspire to wifehood in the poems; she
seems to ridicule and scorn it. She calls it a "soft Eclipse" (199, line 6); it is something that blots you out, makes you fade, grow dark and become dim. To get married
is to be "Born—Bridalled—Shrouded—/In a Day—" (1072, line 10). That is to say that you are "Born" into a new identity, "Bridalled" like a horse under the will and
control of its rider, and ''Shrouded" like a corpse, all in a single day. Her view of marriage is not a positive one. If these are truly her perceptions toward marriage, it is
ludicrous to believe that she is fantasizing about being a wife. If such were the case, the poems would celebrate the virtues and benefits of marriage, not take such an
ironic tone.
Another possibility is that the attitudes and experiences of the "wife" in the poems refers to those she gleaned from other marriages. She observed the marriage of her
parents and could comment on marriage based on these observations. Since she was such a close friend and confidante to her sister­in­law, Susan, it is probable that
she would have held intimate discourse with her upon the subject of marriage. The wife in poem 732 could plausibly have been either her mother or sister­in­law.
However, it seems inconceivable that the "wife" in the other five poems could possibly be anyone but Dickinson. Every one of these poems are in the first person
singular. In many instances, the first person "I" is metrically placed as the stressed syllable of the iamb, emphasizing this first person perspective. In poem 199, "I'm
"wife"—I've finished that—" (line 1), "I'm Czar—I'm 'woman' now—" (line 3), "I think" (line 7) all refer to first person I's, which are emphatically stressed by the
meter. The same is true in poem 463 in the first two lines "I live with Him—I see His face/I go no more away." This is repeated in lines 9 and 10, "I live with Him—I
hear His Voice—/I stand alive—Today." The emphasis placed on this perspective seems to decree that the "wife" can refer to none other than the writer, herself.5
Only in poem 732, which is written from the third person singular feminine point of view, does it seem credible that the "wife" be interpreted as someone else.
The final possibility regarding Dickinson's application of the term wife is as a metaphor for a similar relationship in Dickinson's life. Dickinson had close relationships
with a handful of men, Edward and Austin Dickinson, Samuel Bowles, Thomas Wentworth Higginson, and Charles Wadsworth, to name a few. Many of them,
however, do not bear enough similarity to a marriage relationship to be the metaphorical referent to these poems. Her relationships with Bowles, Higginson, and
Wadsworth, for example, did not involve cohabitation, social distinction, or patriarchal control.
Her relationships with both her father and brother, on the other hand, do have some parallels to a marriage­like relation. They both meet the criterion of cohabitation,
since she lived with them most of her life. As such, her

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 106

relationship with either of them bears that specific similarity to a married relationship. The characteristic of patriarchal control indicates a stronger connection with her
father than with her brother. Austin did become her patriarch after Edward's death, but Emily was already forty­four. Up to this point and after, their relationship was
close and fraternal. Although Sewall likes to downplay assertions made by Lavinia Dickinson and Mabel Todd that Edward Dickinson was tyrannical, he does
maintain that Edward was the patriarch. Emily, herself, remarks in a letter to Austin, "What father says, he means" (Letters, Johnson Letter 82). He was the person in
control and was not to be defied or refuted. Thus, since her relationship with her father bears this similarity to the married relationship as well, if she is referring
metaphorically to some real relationship with a man, her relationship with her father seems to be the most likely referent.
This father­daughter relationship can be assessed based upon the other characteristics of "wife" as well. Social status depends upon social recognition consequent to
taking marriage vows. If a woman does not literally take the vows, she does not obtain the status. It is not requisite to performing wifelike domestic responsibilities,
however. When Dickinson's mother became ill, she was forced to take on many of the domestic and social responsibilities of a married woman. She writes in a letter
of 7 May 1850, "I have always neglected the culinary arts, but attend to them now from necessity, and from a desire to make everything pleasant for father, and
Austin" (Selected Letters 38). The roles of hostess and housekeeper did sanction a share of status along with the responsibility. Emily would have merited some
"wifely" status in playing hostess to her father's guests. She comments on her status and duty in a satirical passage in the same letter:
I am yet the Queen of the court, if regalia be dust, and dirt ... Father and Austin still clamor for food, and I like a martyr am feeding them. Wouldn't you love to see me in these
bonds of great despair, looking around my kitchen, and praying for kind deliverance. ... My kitchen I think I called it, God forbid that it was, or shall be my own—God keep me from
what they call households, except that bright one of 'faith'! (Selected Letters 40)

She recognizes the rank of a wife; she calls herself a "Queen of the court." Yet the "court" is one of "dirt" and ''dust." She compares the subservient station of a wife to
that of a "martyr." The comparison is not an incredible one since the will and desires of a wife are sacrificed to her duties to husband and family. Emily Dickinson,
though unmarried, made this same sacrifice. She maintained the station of a wife and mother in her mother's stead. Consequently, her relationship with her father bears
that similarity as well, making it the most likely metaphorical referent.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 107

Since "wife" as metaphor seems the most plausible hypothesis for Dickinson's use of the term—as opposed to an unwed girl's fantasy or the experiences of some
"wife" other than herself—it is necessary to examine how this metaphor works in the poems. Poem 463 ("I live with Him—I see his face—'') discusses cohabitation.
She literally states in the opening line and repeats in line 9, "I live with Him—." The reference to cohabitation in poem 461 ("A Wife—at Daybreak I shall be—") is
less obvious. This poem examines the thoughts and feelings of a "Maid" on her wedding night, about to become a "Bride." While she waits in her bedroom, fumbling at
her "Childhood's prayer" (9), her husband or "Future climbs the Stair" (8). Although more obscure than 463, it is plausible that the couple live together in this house
with the bedroom and the "Stair," even if they have only recently taken up residence together.
The quality of "wife" as obedient to patriarchal command is also manifest in the poems. Beginning with the most literal example, poem 732 opens with "She rose to His
Requirement," depicting a wife rising to meet the "Requirement" or command of a patriarch or master. The subservience of a wife to patriarchal control is also evident
in the repeated capitalization of the masculine pronouns. While Dickinson's use of punctuation and capitalization is often disregarded as erratic and therefore not
worthy of decisive interpretation, the capitalization of the masculine pronouns is decidedly consistent throughout these poems and deserves consideration. Although
masculine pronouns, when capitalized, often refer to God, in the context of these poems, that is not the best interpretation. The poems deal directly with the subject of
wifehood, not religion. The reference might be to the religious notion of being "married" to God, but this concept refers to an elevated, spiritual commitment to God. It
isn't a relationship that entails housework. Given the mundane tone in the poems, it seems more credible that the pronouns allude to a father, patriarch, or husband.
That they are capitalized gives a strong emphasis to the prominence of the patriarch. In fact, they invoke the power and eminence of the ultimate
father/patriarch/husband; namely, God.
The social status and responsibility of a wife are especially pronounced in this series of poems. She grants the "wife" in the poems various elevated titles because of her
marital status. She refers to the wife as "Czar" (119, line 3), as "Empress" (1072, 4), and "Royal" (1072, 5). These terms describe the rank and position associated
with marriage. In 1072, she hails "wife" as a "Title divine," a reference to the social distinction given to married women. These seemingly laudatory titles, however, are
quite ironic. Her "Empress" is the "Empress of Calvary!", an empress of pain and anguish, not land, people, wealth, or even happiness. Such irony suggests that
Dickinson's attitude toward this distinction was dubious and it was not a title that she seemed to desire.
The poems also associate wifehood with responsibility and duty; the first stanza of poem 732 is a good example.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 108
She rose to His Requirement—dropt
The Playthings of Her Life
To take the honorable Work
Of Woman, and of Wife—

This stanza describes the young girl leaving her childhood pastimes to take on the responsibilities of womanhood. It is quite interesting to consider that she is not doing
this of her own accord, as she naturally matures or grows up. She does this because of "His Requirement." This can be an autobiographical comment on the situation
previously discussed—that she and her sister were forced to take care of her father and brother during the course of their mother's illness. She didn't have to be
married to feel like a wife. She did the "honorable Work" of one already.
Another attribute of wifehood that must be analyzed is that of sexual experience. Poem 461 "A Wife—at Daybreak I shall be" deals exclusively with this subject. Also
the sexual explicitness of 1072 ("Title divine—is mine!") and 1737 ("Rearrange a 'Wife's' affection!") is too prominent to be avoided. If Dickinson's ''wife" in the wife
poems is a metaphor for her relationship with her father and the poems introduce the subject of the sexual experiences, then it is conceivable that there was a sexual
event in Dickinson's relationship with her father. In treating this sensitive subject, it is perhaps best to proceed line by line through each of the poems and attempt to
ascertain where the meaning of "wife" in a sexual sense applies.
The first stanza of 199 states, "I'm 'wife'—I've finished that—/That other state—/I'm Czar—I'm 'Woman' now—/It's safer so—." In this stanza the term "wife" is
contrasted to "That other state." Clearly that other state refers to being unmarried, more specifically to girlhood. The interpretation of "That other state" as girlhood is
supported by the statement in line 3, "I'm 'Woman' now." Line 4, however, introduces a contradiction. Dickinson has stated in her letters and in other poems an
amount of disdain for wife and womanhood. How can she thus say, "It's safer so"? It is either an inconsistency or she is referring to a different aspect of womanhood.
In the other allusions, she was referring to the duties and subservience associated with a wife. She must now be referring to something different. The line makes sense if
that attribute is sexual experience. Sex is "safer" after it has been experienced. It is less physically and psychologically painful. As such both "wife" and "Woman" might
refer to a female who has experienced sex, as opposed to "That other state," virginity. This interpretation also makes sense in light of the last stanza. "This being
comfort—then/That other kind—was pain—." Womanhood in terms of duty and responsibility would not be a "comfort." In fact, Dickinson saw it as martyrdom.
Childhood, not womanhood, was ease and comfort in comparison. Womanhood in terms of sexual practice, however, would be more comfortable;

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 109

intercourse as a child would be painful. Just when she begins to divulge the source of this pain, she cuts herself short saying, "But why compare?/I'm 'Wife'! Stop
there!"
The sexual implications in poem 461 are more distinct. This poem is unmistakably about a young girl becoming a woman through sexual experience. She literally goes
to bed at night a "Maid" and is a woman or "wife" in the morning, "at Daybreak." Lines 3 and 4 read, "At Midnight, I am but a Maid,/How short it takes to make it
Bride." What possibly can occur overnight to transform a child into a woman, if not sexual intercourse? The second stanza suggests this interpretation. "Softly my
Future climbs the Stair,/I fumble at my Childhood's prayer/Soon to be a Child no more.'' The interpretation of these lines as a bride awaiting her groom on their
wedding night was discussed earlier. The last line, however, is quite puzzling. The poet writes, "Savior—I've seen the face—before!" In earlier versions of the poem,
Dickinson did not use the word "Savior"; it was instead "master." While the word "master" certainly makes a connection to patriarch or husband, as does "Savior," this
bride seems startled by her recognition. Surely, a bride must have met her master before this moment. Why should she be surprised at recognizing him now? Perhaps,
he is a figure that is too familiar, one whom she recognizes, but who should not be sharing her bed.
Poem 463 supports the suggestion of a familiar face, like that in poem 461, that is somehow too familiar. In this poem, she admits, "I live with Him—I see His face—/I
go no more away" (1–2). This is a strong indication that the indeterminate "Him" is her father. The reference to a sexual connection between the two comes in the
second stanza.
The Only One—forestalling Mine—
And that—by Right that He
Present a Claim invisible
No Wedlock—granted Me—

The word "Mine" in line 5 refers to "privacy," which occurs in line 4. The only person forestalling her privacy then is the "Him" with whom she lives. This "Him"
forestalls her privacy by right of some "Claim invisible." The invisible claim is contrasted with the visible claim of "Wedlock" mentioned in line 8. Wedlock presents to a
husband the claim of a sexual intercourse. Once wedded, the husband is free to claim the sexual favors that his wife dutifully renders. The man in this poem, however,
appears to be making such a claim upon the persona of the poem, most likely Dickinson, without the overt legality of "Wedlock." Further, after reiterating in the third
stanza that the "Him" is someone with whom she lives and "hear[s] His Voice," she reveals in the fourth stanza that the He has taught her that she has no power to stop
him.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 110

"Taught Me—by Time—the lower Way—/Conviction—Every day—/That Life like This—is stopless—." The word "stopless" is replaced later by "endless.'' Both
words suggest her utter powerlessness against this man. She can only submit to the "Claim invisible" that he makes of her.
Poem 1072 further develops the idea of "wife" without the external or overt manifestation of marriage. The first two lines read, "Title divine—is mine!/The Wife—
without the Sign!" Here, again, she possesses a "title" or "claim" to be a "wife" without the outward "Sign" of marriage, such as a ring, a certificate, or even a husband.
If she claims the title of wife despite no outward sign, the claim is conceivably on account of sexual activity. The "Empress of Calvary" image in line 4 could support
such an interpretation. Calvary, of course, refers to the place where Christ was crucified. By titling herself "Empress of Calvary," Dickinson sees her own suffering as
comparable to that of Christ's. The piercing and penetrating nature of the wounds that Christ received are often interpreted as analogous to sexual penetration. 6 As
previously noted, she saw herself as a "martyr," yet another comparison to Christ.
The last in this series of poems, 1737, is the most baffling. Because of its complexities, it will be cited here in full with a brief analysis following.
Rearrange a "Wife's" affection!
When they dislocate my Brain!
Amputate my freckled Bosom!
Make me bearded like a man!
Blush, my spirit, in thy Fastness—
Blush, my unacknowledged clay—
Seven years of troth have taught thee
More than Wifehood ever may!
Love that never leaped its socket—
Trust entrenched in narrow pain—
Constancy thro' fire—awarded—
Anguish—bare of anodyne!
Burden—borne so far triumphant—
None suspect me of the crown,
For I wear the "Thorns" til Sunset—
Then—my Diadem put on.
Big my Secret but it's bandaged—
It will never get away
Till the Day its Weary Keeper
Leads it through the Grave to thee.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 111

The first stanza is loaded with violent and disjointed anatomical imagery. The word "affection" in line one could refer either to a fond or tender feeling or to a
pathological mental or physical condition. The fact that it is a "'Wife's' affection" and that it is being "rearranged" is very jolting. The words ''dislocate" and "amputate" in
the next lines add to the sense of violent action upon the "Wife's affection," "Brain," and "Bosom." The second stanza suggests humiliation and embarrassment at
"Fastness" and "troth." The word "Blush" is repeated twice. Stanza three is full of acute pain and a feeling of betrayal. The anguish is "bare of anodyne!"; there is no
relief from the pain. The fifth stanza begins with the idea of a "Burden." This "burden" is likely a painful secret, an interpretation confirmed in the last stanza. That it is
"borne so far triumphant" indicates that no one has discovered the secret. In comparing the burden to the crown of "Thorns," she indicates its painful nature and alludes
again to an identity with Christ. The reference to Diadem is also significant. Diadem comes from the Greek "dia," meaning across, plus "dein," meaning to bind. She
seems to be bound to a painful burden. In the last stanza, the line "Big my Secret but it's bandaged" confirms this meaning. The word "bandaged" modifying "Secret"
indicates not only the hidden nature of the secret, but suggests that the secret concerns some sort of injury. No one will ever know for sure, however, since she will
carry it to her grave. The context of the whole poem suggests that the secret involves the violence, humiliation, betrayal, and anguish set forth in the preceding stanzas.
While the "wife" poems can be interpreted in a number of ways, one interpretation seems most satisfactorily to explain the diversity of expression in all of the poems.
This is the interpretation that the "wife" in these poems is a metaphor for a real relationship in Emily Dickinson's life. The relationship which best fits this metaphor is
that with her father. The sexual explicitness, symbols, and images in these poems suggest that this relationship involved a sexual event.
The ways in which Dickinson uses space in her poetry also offer evidence of her possible victimization. Her description of space suggests that writing for her was a
means of constructing a sense of safety or coping with threat. There are many poems in which she describes the house or home, often the model safe space, as a
threatening place. In contrast, she describes the grave as a safe, cheery place, often comparing it to a home. In yet other poems, she gives non­physical human
charactersistics, such as the mind, heart or soul, architectural features, in an attempt to construct safe spaces internally. In all these instances, she seems to be trying to
cope with a sense of threat, quite probably from within her own home, by recreating a sense of home or safety elsewhere.
British psychiatrist Anthony Fry describes safe space as "the conditions that sustain us" (1), including family, good health, and interpersonal relations, as well as
environmental conditions such as home and community. Since the home is where people eat, sleep, and spend time with the family, it is the

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 112

primary place of nourishment, rest, and loving companionship; it is the primary place of safety. When the home is threatened, by financial difficulty, burglary, even
sickness, people often suffer psychologically, sometimes severely. Threats to the home endanger a person's sense of safety and consequently their psychological
stability.
Interestingly, in many of her poems, Dickinson describes the home as a threatening yet inescapable place. In poem 1334, "How soft this Prison," she compares home
to a prison. The prison is described as "soft" and the restricting bars as "sweet" because it refers to a home, not an actual prison. Despite such positive adjectives, it is
also seen as "sullen," giving the house a brooding, depressing air. The varied references to "Prison,'' "Dungeon," and "Incarceration" add to the gloominess and indicate
the inescapability she associates with home. In poem 127 "'Houses—so the Wise Men tell me," she expresses her skepticism that any house, including the "Many
Mansions" which Christ attributes to "his Father," is "snugly built" enough to keep out "the tears" and "the storm." The distrust that she describes in "The way I read a
letter's this" also indicates that she felt unsafe in her own home. She goes to great pains to make sure the door is secure and the room empty before she "pick[s] the
lock" of the envelope. This mistrust, gloom, inescapability, and skepticism toward "home" suggest that Dickinson perceived home with apprehension, that it was not
entirely "safe."
In contrast, Dickinson describes the grave as a place of safety, often comparing it with a house or home. She seems to anticipate gaining a measure of security in death
that she cannot find in life. In poem 457 she describes tombs as "Sweet—safe—Houses" and as "Glad—gay—Houses," demonstrating the gaiety, security, and
happiness which she envisions a home should provide. In poem 1743, she describes the grave as "my little cottage," in which she "make[s] the parlor orderly" and "lay
[s] the marble tea." Once again the grave is described as a cheery and inviting place. Ironically both places are the residences of the dead. Poem 1701 "To their
apartment deep" also employs the grave as dwelling metaphor, although it lacks some of the cheerfulness of the above poems. Nevertheless, the poem does see the
grave as a place of safety and invulnerability as it is a place where "No ribaldry may creep." Feeling threatened and apprehensive about her own home, she yearns for
a home that is safe. Envisioning the grave as a safe, cheery space, she anticipates a sense of security in death that she did not receive in her own home.
Dickinson also turned inward, seeking comfort and security internally. Evidence of this is signified in the many poems in which she describes non­physical interior
"spaces," such as the heart, mind, and soul, in physical, architectural terms. The heart, however, is not seen as a safe space, nor is the mind. Both are vulnerable to
violation. The soul, however, seems to be impervious to such encroachment.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 113

In poem 1567, the heart is described in spatial and architectural terms; it has "many doors." Poem 928 "The Heart has narrow Banks" describes the sea in spatial
terms as a metaphor for the passions of the heart. Bounded by "narrow banks" and "measur[ing] like the Sea," the heart has "insufficient Area'' when it encounters a
hurricane or emotional trauma. The heart in this state "learns/that Calm is but a Wall/of unattempted Gauze"; tranquility is unprotected within such a wall. "An instant's
Push demolishes/A Questioning—dissolves." While architecturally defined with area, measurements, even walls, the heart does not have sound, impenetrable
enclosures. Rather, it is fragile and vulnerable as a space. It is unsafe.
In 632, "The Brain is wider than the Sky," Dickinson describes the vastness of the mind, giving it dimensionality in breadth, depth, and weight. In 280 "I felt a Funeral
in my Brain" the mind has the physical space to accommodate a social gathering. The lines, "And creak across my Soul" and "then a Plank in Reason, broke," suggest
the mind has a floor, a boundary defining physical space, and tangible material construction. While this construction is sounder than the gauze walls of the heart, it is still
penetrable. A "plank in reason" can, despite its rigidity, be broken.
In poem 1142 "The props assist the House," Dickinson asserts that the "perfected Life," like a house, is built into a "Soul." Just as props are used in the building of a
house, they also asssist in the building of the soul. The poem sets up a comparison between the physical architectural space of a house, including the way it is
constructed, and the interior space of the soul. The comparison works well because a house also frames the development of the soul, a development which occurs for
the most part in the home. Dickinson also describes the soul architecturally in 1055 "The Soul should always stand ajar," giving it tangible space and a bolt and door.
The metaphor is similar to that of 303 "The Soul selects her own Society," except in the latter poem, the soul is personified as inhabiting a physical space instead of
being that space. As a space, the soul seems to be the most sound, an idea consistent with Dickinson's equating the grave with a safe home.
Ultimately, it is poem 670 "One need not be a Chamber—to be Haunted" that best illustrates how Dickinson compares the inner regions of the psyche to unprotected
physical space. In this poem, she does not distinguish between mind, heart, or soul. She refers to "Brain" and "Body" alike, comparing the whole being to the space of
a house with chambers and corridors. The entire poem follows:
One need not be a Chamber—to be Haunted—
One need not be a House—
The Brain has Corridors—surpassing
Material Place—

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 114
Far safer, of a Midnight Meeting
External Ghost
Than its interior Confronting—
That Cooler Host.
Far safer, through an Abbey gallop,
The Stones a'chase—
Than Unarmed, one's a 'self encounter—
In lonesome Place—
Ourself behind ourself, concealed—
Should startle most—
Assassin hid in our Apartment
Be Horror's least
The Body—borrows a Revolver—
He bolts the Door—
O'erlooking superior spectre—
Or More—

In representing a human being as a tangible space, she suggests that the mind can be violated and it can be haunted. Dickinson then asserts that it is horrifying to
examine one's own haunting or to recognize one's own violation. The power with which she expresses this idea also attests to the possibility that Dickinson was
personally violated. She seems to wrestle with this internal "Ghost" and with her own psychological stability regularly. Some threatening event not only penetrated her
own home but her own person, as well.
Some event occurred in the early 1860s that caused Dickinson an enormous amount of pain. An interpretation of Dickinson's relationship with her father in terms of
the "wife" poems suggests that Dickinson saw herself as fulfilling the role of wife to him. Given the sexual references in the poems, some sexual event in the father­
daughter relationship is likely to have been a cause for Dickinson to adopt the voice of a "wife." That Dickinson seems to view her home as unsafe, even threatening,
seems to support such an argument. In contrast, she visualizes the grave as a homey place of safety and happiness and the soul as an internal space, which is
impervious to violation. While she materializes the mind and heart into physical spaces, ultimately both are vulnerable to emotional and psychological "haunting."
Through spatial imagery, defining non­physical spaces in architectural terms and imbuing them with the characteristics of home, Dickinson uses her writing to create
safe space, a sense of comfort and security that she never fully attained in her lifetime.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 115

Notes
1. I was unable to locate a study that dealt with the violence in Dickinson's poetry. While the biographical explanations of her "crisis" period that I consulted generally
ignore the violent images, my research was not exhaustive. The authoritiative biographers such as Sewall, Bianchi, Todd, Johnson, and Whicher do not treat this
subject.
2. While I only cite directly from Finkelhor, I consulted Jean Goodwin, Sexual Abuse: Incest Victims and Their Families (Boston: John Wright, 1982) and Judith
Lewis Herman and Lisa Hirschman, Father­Daughter Incest (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1981).
3. Emily Dickinson was the middle child of the three children of Edward and Emily Norcross Dickinson. Emily had an older brother, Austin, who married Susan
Gilbert, one of Emily's close friends. She also had a younger sister, Lavinia, who, like Emily, never married.
4. The first volume of Johnson's collection of Dickinson's letters contains these early letters to Abiah Root, Susan Gilbert, Jane Humphrey, and others.
5. The personal nature of her poems, written only for herself and for close friends and family members and not for publication, also suggests that she was writing about
herself. The first person pronoun, I, is the most frequently occurring word in all 1775 poems. With the exception of only a handful, these poems were not even
discovered until after her death. She wrote them, sorted them, tied them in little bundles with thread and hid them. It seems undeniable, given the introspective and
secretive nature of her writing, that all of those first person I's could refer to no one but herself.
6. The ecstacy of St. Theresa being pierced by the angel's arrow is a similar analogy. Visually represented in the famed Bernini sculpture, this ecstacy is interpreted as
both spiritual and physical.
Works Cited
Bianchi, Martha Dick. Emily Dickinson Face to Face: Unpublished Reminisciences and Letters. Boston: Houghton, 1932.
Bianchi, Martha Dick. The Life and Letters of Emily Dickinson. Boston: Houghton, 1924.
Bingham, Millicent Todd. Emily Dickinson's Home: Letters of Edward Dickinson and His Family. New York: Harper, 1955.
Dickinson, Emily. Emily Dickinson Selected Letters. Edited by Thomas H. Johnson. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1958.
Dickinson, Emily. Letters of Emily Dickinson. Edited by Mabel Loomis Todd. New York: World, 1951.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 116

Dickinson, Emily. The Letters of Emily Dickinson. Edited by Thomas H. Johnson. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1958.
Dickinson, Emily. The Poems of Emily Dickinson. Edited by Thomas H. Johnson. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1995.
Finkelhor, David. Sexually Victimized Children. New York: The Free Press, 1979.
Fry, Anthony. Safe Space: How to Survive in a Threatening World. London: J. M. Dent & Sons, 1987.
Mossberg, Barbara A.C. Emily Dickinson: When a Writer Is a Daughter. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1982.
Sewall, Richard S. The Life of Emily Dickinson. New York: Ferrar, Straus and Giroux, 1974.
Wolff, Cynthia Griffin. Emily Dickinson. Reading, MA: Addison­Wesley, 1988.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 117

"There is no home there": Re(his)tor(iciz)ing Captivity and the Other in Spofford's "Circumstance"
Lisa Logan
I.
Spaces can be real and imagined. Spaces can tell stories and unfold histories. Spaces can be interrupted, appropriated, and transformed through artistic and literary practice.
—bell hooks, Yearning: Race, Gender, and Cultural Politics

In Hard Facts, Phillip Fisher argues that the nineteenth­century American novel "executes the past" through popular forms. This "retroactive" use of the past—in
popular settings and stories that recognize, repeat, and "work through" it—"transform[s] the present" by rationalizing and making acceptable ''hard facts," including the
killing of Indians, the system of slavery, and industrial capitalism (3–8). The historical novel thus rehistoricizes and naturalizes an American history that is already
complete. Fisher's point is that historical fiction imposes on its subject a narrative that suits the ideological present—that the spaces of American history, including the
wilderness, home, and city, are, to paraphrase bell hooks, subject to appropriation and tranformation through literary practice. Fisher's argument illustrates how the
uncomfortable facts of American history can be contained and made safe through narrative.
This safety is often achieved through the use of racialized discourses. As Toni Morrison's Playing in the Dark has shown, a reexamination of the Africanist presence
in American literature uncovers the assumptions and ideologies of Anglo American writers. Morrison demonstrates that figures of race are central to narratives of
Anglo American selfhood; through these figures, Anglo writers confront their own national and cultural identities. The Africanist presence, Morrison argues, has
permitted American writers to contemplate risky subjects in safety (28).

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 118

Narratives of cultural identity are closely tied to the ideologically charged spaces of American national and individual histories. As Biddy Martin and Chandra Talpade
Mohanty point out, identities are linked to ideologically grounded "homespaces." They argue that the perceived safety of home is founded on unquestioned
assumptions about self and Other:
[Home] refers to the place where one lives within safe, protected boundaries; 'not being home' is a matter of realizing that home was an illusion based on the exclusion of specific
histories of oppression and resistance, the repression of differences even within oneself. (196)

For Martin and Mohanty, "home" becomes a metaphor for identity. "Home" represents a set of positions that we occupy unself­consciously; the ideological
underpinnings of these positions are covered over and unacknowledged.
I wish to locate the captivity narrative and Harriet Prescott Spofford's short story "Circumstance," a nineteenth­century revision of this genre, at the interstices of
Fisher's, Morrison's, and Martin and Mohanty's theories. To convey and stabilize the cultural meaning of American selfhood, the captivity narrative depends on
configurations of the American landscape, such as home and wilderness, in which gendered and racialized ideologies are imbedded. According to Fisher, the captivity
narrative "miniaturizes" early national history, casting Anglo Saxon "invaders as prisoners" (43) and legitimizing their campaign of genocide against Native Americans. It
typically traces the white victim's capture, imprisonment, rescue, and restoration against the dramatic and binarily opposed settings of home and wilderness. For
women writers, this movement between home and wilderness, safety and danger, is further complicated by their disempowered positions in a dominant culture that
maps its racialized and gendered ideologies onto their bodies and which struggles to make women's acts and words "safe.'' In a culture that determines when and how
women can be subjects in discourse and that imposes material sanctions on women who do not comply, women who write about captivity tread a tricky path between
safety and danger.
Mary Rowlandson's captivity narrative The Sovereignty and Goodness of God (1682), for example, explicitly underscores her position of safety within a culture that
aggressively contains women's difference and disorder within hegemonic structures. Throughout her narrative, Rowlandson negotiates safe spaces from which to
speak, spaces which have been disrupted by her Indian captivity and by Puritan attitudes toward "public" women and their speech. Rowlandson fashions acceptable
narrative positions for herself, including that of chaste and pious Christian, Puritan goodwife and deputy husband. She constructs her captors as her polar opposite, the
savage and heathen racial

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 119
1

Other. Against this fixed and stereotyped notion of the Other, the woman writer negotiates a safe discursive position.
At the same time, however, the very presence of the Other disrupts and brings into question that safety. The captivity experience unsettles the spatial categories of
home and wilderness, exposing the ideologies on which they rest as tenuous. The certainty of these spaces is predicated on unexamined assumptions about and
uncontested distinctions between self and Other, right and wrong, truth and lies. The captivity experience destabilizes these assumptions and distinctions and challenges
the ideological foundations underlying the safety of home. In the captivity narrative, as in Martin and Mohanty's essay on identity politics, home becomes not only a
physical space but a metaphor for women's unsettled and unsettling position.
In revisiting the captivity narrative, Harriet Prescott Spofford's short story "Circumstance" is similarly concerned with woman's cultural and discursive "place." The
story transpires in the wilderness and domestic spaces of America's early national history. In representing the captivity narrative from a nineteenth­century perspective,
Spofford's story engages in the politics of historicization; she "interrupts, appropriates, and transforms" history's spaces. In Spofford's narrative, as in the early
American captivity narrative, domestic and wilderness spaces serve as metaphors for hegemonic definitions of safety and danger which are mapped onto "woman" and
which threaten to erase female subjectivity. As in nineteenth­century romantic fiction, Spofford invokes cultural configurations of race as she engages questions of
American space and woman's ''place." Like Rowlandson's narrative, "Circumstance" is concerned with woman's negotiation of safe spaces in culture and in discourse.
In negotiating woman's position, Spofford's story brings into tension women's literary traditions, American romanticism, and figures and discourses of race. Ultimately,
she seems to challenge the stability of these categories and, in doing so, to question the safety of woman's "place" in the national spaces of home and wilderness.
II.
There is no home there. The log­house, the barns, the neighboring farms, the fences, are all blotted out and mingled in one smoking ruin. Desolation and death were indeed there,
and beneficence and life in the forest.
—"Circumstance"

Spofford sets her story in the margins, at the edge of the northern forest of Maine and, as Anne Dalke has pointed out, explores the tenuousness of

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 120

experience. That tenuousness, I argue, stems from the text's collapsing of typical categories of home and wilderness. The heroine has spent the day at the "home" of a
sick friend, a home associated with illness, pain, and death. Unlike Rowlandson, who often "can not find her way," she is not afraid to enter the forest alone and
perceives ''the sweet homefeeling of a young and tender wintry wood" (84, my emphasis). As this "sincere and earnest woman" "sallie[s] forth" into the evening
wilderness, her husband remains at home with the baby. She must traverse three miles of woods to get home, described as "one of a dozen log­houses ... with their
half­cleared demesnes separating them ... from a wilderness untrodden save by stealthy native or deadly panther tribes" (84). The ominous proximity of the "stealthy
native" and "deadly panther tribes" undercuts the security and safety of home. Home is situated at the edge of a "great forest," in "half­cleared demesnes"; while
Spofford's language is apparently oppositional, it also suggests the mutually dependent natures of home and wilderness—one is made possible only by the "clearing
away" of the other. This language undercuts and problematizes the opposition of home to wilderness and recalls Martin and Mohanty's observation that home is "an
illusion of coherence and safety based on ... exclusion ... [and] repression" (196). While nineteenth­century culture represses what lies outside home as "Other,"
Spofford's story seems to forward home's uncertain and illusory qualities. Home is never quite "cleared" of the wilderness; the forest compromises its "domain"—
questions the rights and privileges which it assumes.
The heroine's "captivity" aloft in a tree in the "arms" of an "Indian Devil" panther reenacts the captivity narrative's concern with home and wilderness, and the
relationships between these categories and women's subjectivity. Like Rowlandson, who negotiates safe speaking positions before an audience wary of women's
public speech, Spofford's heroine's voice—her singing—meets the demands of her captor, satisfies her instinct, and represents conscious choices and strategies. Her
song at once complies with and questions essentialist definitions of women's words: "Again her lips opened by instinct but the sound that issued thence came by
reason. She had heard that music charmed wild beasts..."(86). Her singing is a choice, a substitution of song for scream. What she sings is inadvertent and
unconscious: "[A] little thread of melody stole out, a rill of tremulous motion; it was the cradle­song with which she rocked her baby..."(86). Although she sings an
expected song, one seemly for a woman and a mother, the circumstances of her singing disrupt the "safety" of cultural images of "woman." The picture of a mother
singing her child to sleep before the hearth, which a lullaby invokes, alters to a woman rocking and singing in the arms of a dark and savage panther. By shifting the
circumstances of the heroine's singing from home to wilderness, Spofford suggests that a woman's voice might be heard in other spaces than the home.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 121

"Circumstance" questions safe categories of home and wilderness in other ways as well. One of the first images to cross the heroine's mind following her capture is of
her child "sleeping rosily" and "the father cleaning his gun, with one foot on the green wooden rundle" (86). The home, traditionally the domain of the wife, is here
secured by the father; the wife, typically safe at home, confronts the wilderness alone. The images of her husband's well­oiled gun and his foot that rocks the cradle
bring into view exactly who "keeps" the home and at what cost. Distinctions between home and wilderness are blurred and uncertain. As the heroine endures her
torture, she dreams of home:
She fancied the light pouring through the chink and then shut in again, with all the safety and comfort and joy, her husband taking down the fiddle and playing lightly with his
head inclined, playing while she sang, while she sang for her life to an Indian Devil. Then she knew he was fumbling for and finding some shining fragment and scoring it down
the yellowing hair. ... (88)

Here Spofford juxtaposes the heroine's night peril with the idyllic "safety and comfort and joy" of the lit cabin. The heroine's singing to her husband's fiddle seems to
merge with her wilderness singing. She imagines her husband "playing while she sang, while she sang for her life to an Indian Devil." Her husband's safety and comfort
is almost at the expense of her danger. His "fumbling for and finding some shining fragment" parallels the fumbling of her captor's claws in her clothing, his "scoring it
down the yellowing hair" recalls the beast's "scoring'' of her white flesh. In this passage, distinctions between the safety of home and the danger of the wilderness are
made murky as the figure of the husband blurs into that of the beast. 2
Perhaps most ambivalent and uncertain is the story's attitude toward rescue. In Rowlandson's narrative, restoration constitutes reassimilation into her former home and
position. Yet her text questions this restoration through its depiction of her sleepless nights and constant worry over the uncertainty of her physical and spiritual safety.
"Circumstance," too, insistently challenges notions of rescue and the promise of safety held out by husband and home. With her husband's appearance, the heroine
forgets her "fervent vision of God's peace" and imagines only her log home:
Cheerful home sound then, how full of safety and all comfort and rest it seemed! what sweet morning incidents of sparking fire and sunshine, of gay household bustle, shinning
dresser, and cooing baby, of steaming cattle in the yard, and brimming milk­pails at the door! what pleasant voices! what laughter! what security! (95)

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 122

The heroine may recover this idyll only through the loss of her spiritual vision, her voice, and, of course, through more danger. Since the panther's body covers her
own, her husband's bullet must "pierce her body" before "reaching any vital part of the beast" (94). Domestic bliss is possible only at the expense—indeed the
annihilation—of her voice and self. Her vision of her happy home is followed by her discovery that "her voice was hoarse and sharp,—every tone cut like a knife,—
the notes became heavy to lift,—withheld by some hostile pressure,—impossible. One gasp, a convulsive effort, and there was silence..." (95). Home and safety, the
passage seems to imply, are exclusive of woman's voice. Her silence is effected by some "hostile pressure,'' which is at once the physical strain of singing all night and,
perhaps, the presence of cultural forces militated against women's expression.
Ironically, it is the beast—the Indian Devil, the violent Other—who saves her. The panther, spying her husband, springs up and seizes her, and her husband fires. The
Indian Devil's body breaks his captive's fall and rescues her from her husband's gunfire. "Circumstance" seems to ask who the Other really is, who has the power to
rescue, and what that rescue implies.
But Spofford has still more questions about home and safety. Returning to their log­house, the family discovers "no home there" (96). Their settlement has burned to
the ground in an apparent Indian attack. As the two look on, the husband's gun falls away from him, reinforcing his inability to "rescue." They are faced with a curious
truth: "Desolation and death were indeed there, and beneficence and life in the forest" (96). "Circumstance" questions the boundaries between safety and danger and
inverts the assumptions beneath early America's opposing definitions of home and wilderness.
III.
Fire is not half ourselves; as it devours, arouses neither hatred nor disgust; is not to be known by the strength of our lower natures let loose; does not drip our blood into our faces
from foaming chops, nor mouth nor slaver above us with vitality. Let us be ended by fire, and we are ashes, for the winds to bear, the leaves to cover; let us be ended by wild beasts,
and the base, cursed thing howls with us forever through the forest.
—"Circumstance"

In Playing in the Dark, Toni Morrison links the Africanist presence in American literature to nineteenth­century American romanticism. The romantic tradition, she
observes, offered Anglo American writers a strategy for dealing with their "New World" fears and for exploring Americans' boundless capacity for uncertainty; the
African American served as a metaphor for the

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 123

limitless terror Anglo Americans faced and which they termed the "power of blackness." These romantic fears are, of course, cast in a different light for women, whose
marginalized positions in nineteenth­century culture necessarily complicate Morrison's characterization of the romantic "terror of human freedom." Throughout
"Circumstance," 3 Spofford's use of race exists in tension with her more explicit critique of dominant cultural narratives about woman's "place." I suggest that we read
this tension as a cultural politics. We might ask, how do figures of race and racialized discourses allow Spofford to contemplate dangerous subject matter safely?
The captivity narrative relies on figures of race to negotiate American history and cultural identity. The threat of national and cultural disorder is expressed in the
unsettled wilderness and mapped onto an inexplicably "savage" racial Other. Spofford's nineteenth­century captivity narrative negotiates the spaces of American
history from a woman's perspective, exploring home and wilderness as positions from which women might speak. Spofford's story challenges categories of home and
wilderness, a challenge which depends on the story's use of the racial Other, onto whom ideas about violence, power, and sexuality are displaced. I wish to consider
how this displacement at once questions and conserves racialized categories of self and Other. Specifically, the figure of the Indian Devil affords Spofford a site for
exploring in safety culturally disruptive notions about woman's "place."
Judith Fetterley has argued that Spofford's Indian Devil is a metaphor for "unrestrained male sexuality ... often let loose on the bodies of women" (226). The Indian
Devil "lick[s] her bare arm with his rasping tongue and pour[s] over her the wide stream of his hot foetid breath" (86). She "saw instinctively the fierce plunge" of his
claws, and feels them tear her with "agony" and "quivery disgust'' (86). Caught in his "great lithe embrace," she sees with horror white and red—his white tusks, red
glaring eyes, and long red tongue, her own white flesh and crimson blood. As Fetterley notes, the passage can be read as "an experience of 'rape,' a nightmare as
likely to occur in the home as in the woods" (266). This violence, I argue, at once historicizes and sexualizes nineteenth­century relationships between Native American
men and Anglo American women. In this way, the "Indian Devil's" death is made "safe."
The image of the husband with his gun seems consistently and closely linked to sexual violation. When her captor first seizes her, she calls not upon God but on her
husband. Her singing is punctuated by images of her husband safe at home, rocking the baby, cleaning his gun, rosining his bow. At one point, his fingerwork at the
fiddle blurs into the Indian Devil's clawing at her body. Her husband's approach is heralded by "[a] remote crash of brushwood [that] told of some other beast on his
depredations" (93). His intrusion marks yet another violation—her loss of voice and vision. It may be, as Fetterley contends, that Spofford's Indian Devil encodes the
violence men promise for

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 124

women at home, an encoding that Spofford anticipates her women readers will understand. The racialized "beast," then, offers a safe space for Spofford to articulate
such a revolutionary notion.
But I suggest that this reading needs to be complicated for a number of reasons. First, I suggest that we consider the violence the heroine endures from her sexualized
and racialized captor within other paradigms. Fetterley asks us to view the story in terms of the "violation and vulnerability" women faced when they entered into art.
Invoking Hawthorne's remarks that literature should "exhibit women's bodies, naked, without restraint of decency," Fetterley argues that the violence in
"Circumstance'' represents women's sense of "shame and loathing at such enforced and public exposure" (265). I contend, however, that dominant cultural
constructions of "true womanhood" are equally violent in that they threaten to erase women's subjectivity. Essentialist definitions of "woman" and her "place" violate
women by demanding that they enact their lives and works according to hegemonic definitions. The panther promises punishment if the singing fails to please. Similarly,
nineteenth­century American culture's expectations for women's acts and words promise the withdrawal of those privileges extended to feminine "virtue" if women fail
to live up to those expectations. The promise of privilege to the virtuous implies that certain women may deserve a whole range of violent and punitive remunerations,
which could include bad reviews, failure to find work, abandonment, and rape. Violence, therefore, is linked not only to women's vulnerability or wish to remain
private. Rather, one's biological circumstance, being born a woman, invites exposure, scrutiny, and, possibly, violation. The heroine's vocal response to her capture
and violation places in tension woman's voice and her violation. The juxtaposition of these terms recalls that captivity has historically been a pretext for women's writing
as well as a place where the meaning of women's subjectivity has been struggled over. The captivity narrative, produced in an era that punished women's public
speech with excommunication and banishment, concerns women's negotiation of discursive space. Spofford substitutes the Indian Devil of her maternal grandmother's
legend for Rowlandson's "heathens," and the heroine's singing replaces Rowlandson's "true story." 4
As Anne K. Mellor argues, romanticism "requires the construction of an Other, which is seen as a threat to the originating subject ..." (3). The romantic artist
constructs his beloved as Other, who must be possessed, consumed, effaced, and destroyed if he is to achieve his goal. According to Mellor, consummation "can only
be achieved through the literal annihilation of the consciousness of the division between the lover and his beloved" (26). Mellor's comments recall the famous American
romantic heroines, Ligeia, Madeline Usher, Beatrice Rappaccini, all victims of violent male artist figures. Spofford, whose style and subject matter place her within
traditions of American romanticism,5 writes from a discursive moment that mythologized the male artist and

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 125

predicated his aesthetic transcendence on the possession and destruction of the female Other. In returning to the captivity narrative to imagine her female artist (the
singing heroine), Spofford returns to a genre in which the racialized Other enables the subject's spiritual vision and conversion. The racialized Indian Devil provides
both a safe and dangerous site for exploring the woman artist's position and voice.
But the panther does not merely represent the Other. As in Rowlandson's captivity narrative, in which the wilderness experience destabilizes categories of self and
Other, and as in romantic fiction, in which, as Morrison writes, the "subject of the dream is the dreamer" (17), Spofford's text conflates categories of self and Other.
The narrator observes that, unlike fire, beasts such as the Indian Devil are "half ourselves" when "the strength of our lower natures [are] let loose" (89). I find it
significant that the beast's consonance is with "our'' natures, implying that boundaries such as human/beast, white/Indian, Christian/heathen, and male/female are
indistinct. This indistinctness is perhaps most visible when the husband shoots the panther out of the tree, and there follows "a terrible yell of desperation ... that filled
her ears with savage echoes" (95). Here Spofford removes the agency from this "terrible yell." Whether these "savage echoes" issue from the panther, the husband, or
the woman herself is left—deliberately, I think—ambiguous. The question of agency here foregrounds the collapsing of categories that Spofford effects and hints
quietly that woman's voice might articulate the unseemly. The panther—the racialized figure, the easy stereotype—affords Spofford a strategy through which to
explore this possibility obliquely and in safety.
IV.
Oh, was there no remedy? Was there nothing to counteract it, nothing to dissipate that black drop, to make it colorless, powerless, harmless, a thing of air? Were there no sweet,
good people among all those dead and gone women? ... What gifts were these grandmothers going to give the child then? she asked.
—Spofford, "The Godmothers"

"Circumstance," a revision of the early American captivity narrative, "interrupts, appropriates, and transforms" the spaces of American history as they map dominant
ideologies onto women's bodies. The story is concerned with "place," which I have tried to define as at once the physical settings of home and wilderness and the
ideological categories of self/Other, man/woman imbedded in them. "Circumstance" struggles with the meanings and uses of the past from the nineteenth­century
present Spofford occupied. In considering what those

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 126

meanings and uses might be, I turn to Spofford's short story "The Godmothers" (1896).
Like "Circumstance," "The Godmothers" focuses on the collision of two worlds. The heroine, Rosomond, has left her American home for marriage to a L'Aiglenoir and
has just given birth to an heir in her husband's "ancestral stronghold.'' As the heroine lies "faint and weak" in a "dim vast chamber," the L'Aiglenoir grandmothers "step
from [the] frames" of their sea­gallery portraits (207), reminding the heroine of their history of scandal, forgery, counterfeit, adultery, opium, poison, cruelty, the
guillotine, and the madhouse—a history of "black blood" (214). Rosomond responds to these visitors with terror, crying "What gifts were these grandmothers going to
give the child then?" (215).
Like "Circumstance," this story is concerned with a history of "blood," only the politics of possession and empire are displaced onto the French aristocracy. Its
concern with national "color" is displaced onto the "purples and scarlets" of the European grandmothers versus Rosomond's own wan and pallid American ancestors.
Rosomond's question—what shall be passed on to her child?—is, according to Phillip Fisher, the question of all American writers: What is the relationship of history to
the national identity of the present? I suggest that "The Godmothers" speaks intertextually to the American romantic fiction and women's captivity traditions which
Spofford worked within by engaging this question. Spofford attempts to work out a safe and "usable past" from which to speak and which to pass on.
The story seems expressly concerned with woman­centered traditions. Rosomond's husband is "away on the water, or in the hunt, or at the races" (208). The
L'Aiglenoir stronghold has historically been kept by its women, who, to bring the family its lands and titles, traded themselves and their integrity. Rosomond at first
discounts them as "all only tradition," saying that their lives "would have been dreadful if [the stories] were true" (209). Her husband reminds her, however, that
"happiness has no history," "virtue has few adventures," and that "the big wills, the big passions" are "memorable ... and drown out the others" (209–10). His words
seem to address directly Spofford's own position within women's and canonical literary traditions. What is her "place" to be? What is her relationship to her literary
descendants and ancestors? What will be remembered and how?
"The Godmothers" centers its treatment of American history and literary traditions, as in "Circumstance," on color. Rosomond contrasts the "pallor of her colonial and
nineteenth­century New England grandmothers with the "purples and scarlets of [European] women of great passions, of scope, of daring and deed and electric
force" (214). Rosomond views Anglo American women's histories and traditions as wan and disempowered. She imagines her New England ancestors:

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 127
Far off, by the curtain of the doorway, huddled together like a flock of frightened doves—gentle ladies, quiet, timid, humble before heaven, ladies of placid lives, no opportunities,
small emotions, narrow routine, praying by form, acting by precedent, without individuality, whose goodness was negative, whose doings were paltry, their drab beings swamped,
and drowned, and extinguished. ... (214)

Rosomond's grandmothers are colorless as drab doves, adhering to the outward forms of religion and culture in dull lives that fail to question the "narrow routine" of
woman's "place." In leaving America for Europe, Rosomond rejects her American grandmothers' "passive virtues" of self­effacement, self­sacrifice, and quiet
acceptance for ''great drama" and a "larger nature." Her choice seems to suggest a failure to locate within American culture a place from which to counter its "pallid"
narratives of femininity.
"The Godmothers" represents Spofford's engagement with divergent narratives of American history and literary tradition. The L'Aiglenoirs recall the uncomfortable
truths about America's past that "Circumstance" invokes: colonial expansion and the genocide of Native Americans. The L'Aiglenoir family was borne of rape, after a
"sea­rover had scaled the heights" of a lady's castle and "taken her, loathing and hating him, to wife" (212). This family history speaks to both the disturbing history of
American expansionism and the impact of patriarchal culture on racialized and gendered Others. Out of these tensions emerged a tradition of Anglo women's writing
based on the domestic and wilderness captivity of women's lives, a tradition which, like dominant cultural narratives and canonical literary traditions, often relied on
figures of race and color.
"The Godmothers" seems to respond to troublesome American histories and traditions by reimagining a whitewashed and safe space from which the young child, the
L'Aiglenoir of the twentieth century, like the woman writer, might emerge. Such a space is figured forth in the beautiful and "original savage," "swift and supple ... with
free and fearless foot, large­limbed and lofty as Thusnelda, clad in her white wolfskin, with the cloud of her yellow hair fallen about her, carrying her green bough,
strong, calm, sure" (216). In Spofford's "original savage" a romanticized Native American woman blurs into a curiously Nordic goddess. Her values are "... scorn for
the ignoble, trust in thy fellow, dependence on thine own lust sinew and unconquerable will,—familiar friend of hardship and content, spare, and pure, and strong,—
joy in the earth, the sun, the wind, faith in the unseen" (216). This noble savage, her blonde whiteness a product of nineteenth­century aesthetics of feminine beauty,
represents "the unpolluted, strong, wild strain in [her son's] blood, the vital savage" (216).
"The Godmothers" attempts to rewrite American history onto an Anglo woman's body, to construct a history and tradition that is safe to pass on. The

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 128

story evinces an incredible amount of anxiety about nation, Anglo American women, and American history and literary traditions. Spofford maintains the integrity of
"blood" by positing the pre­colonial, pre­slavery, and insistently white body of a European ancestral godmother. In this way, she makes the spaces of history and
tradition "safe." Rosomond's husband tells her that "pictures are no more certified than the traditions'' (210). "Circumstance" and "The Godmothers" attempt to
reimagine and transform American history and traditions. Her fiction presents its own gallery of pictures that revises the spaces in which history and tradition have
mapped discursive and cultural meanings onto women's bodies. In trying to make these spaces "safe," her fiction is no more or less "certified" than those histories it
appropriates and transforms. Spofford's is a whitewashed "picture" in the gallery, illustrating what is at stake in making American spaces safe.
Notes
1. For a more detailed discussion of Rowlandson's negotiation of discursive space, see my "Mary Rowlandson and the 'Place' of the Woman Subject."
2. Judith Fetterley writes about the sexual overtones of the panther's attack, arguing that it represents the displaced and menacing sexual power of men "who cannot
be the woman's husband," that is, Native Americans. Fetterley argues that, although the text hints that "home is where the beasts are," it "stops short" of identifying the
husband with the panther (267). Fetterley concludes that Spofford's story exemplifies the pervasive racist imagination of nineteenth­century white writers. My reading,
however, suggests that Spofford's boundaries are less explicit than Fetterley implies. I wish to explore the relationship of Spofford's use of race to American literary
and historical spaces.
3. Spofford's other works, such as "The Amber Gods," "The Black Bess," "The Moonstone Mass," and "The Godmothers," operate this way as well.
4. Halbeisen describes the story's inception in Prescott family legend. Spofford's links to Rowlandson are even more coincidental than her use of captivity conveys: the
Prescott family settled in Lancaster, Massachusetts and was probably living there at the time that Rowlandson was taken captive.
5. Bendixen makes this point in more detail, xxii.
Works Cited
Bendixen, Alfred. "Introduction" to 'The Amber Gods' and Other Stories by Harriet Prescott Spofford. Ed. Alfred Bendixen. New Brunswick: Rutgers University
Press, 1989.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 129

Dalke, Anne. "'Circumstance' and the Creative Woman: Harriet Prescott Spofford." Arizona Quarterly 41.1 (Spring 1985): 71–85.
Fetterley, Judith, ed. Provisions: A Reader from Nineteenth­Century American Women. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1985.
Fisher, Phillip. Hard Facts: Setting and Form in the American Novel. New York: Oxford University Press, 1985.
Halbeisen, Elizabeth K. Harriet Prescott Spofford: A Romantic Survival. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1985.
hooks, bell. Yearning: Race, Gender, and Cultural Politics. Boston: South End Press, 1990.
Logan, Lisa. "Mary Rowlandson and the 'Place' of the Woman Subject." Early American Literature 28:3 (Winter 1993): 255–77.
Martin, Biddy and Chandra Talpade Mohanty. "Feminist Politics: What's Home Got to Do With It?" Feminist Studies/Critical Studies. Ed. Teresa de Lauretis.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1986.
Mellor, Anne K. Romanticism and Gender. New York: Routledge, 1993.
Morrison, Toni. Playing in the Dark: Whiteness and the Literary Imagination. New York: Vintage, 1992.
Spofford, Harriet Prescott. 'The Amber Gods' and Other Stories. Ed. Alfred Bendixen. New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press, 1989.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 131

"Entirely Unprotected": Rebecca Ketcham's Trail Diary
Mary Sylwester
Safe space for women on the overland trails was complicated by the coordinates of the adventure. In the early nineteenth century, overwhelming physical danger was
perceived to arise from the geographical region between the Missouri and Columbia Rivers, a space inhabited by alien peoples and fraught with unknown hazards. To
step across the western border of Iowa or Missouri in those days meant to expose oneself and one's family to the insecurity posed by a lack of regulation. No towns,
and few forts, intervened in the vast expanse from Council Bluffs to the Columbia River. In leaving friends and family, emigrants risked losing support networks and
social frames of reference and thus entered a cultural danger zone. Within the emigrant space, protection lay in the temporary dissolution of the wall between public
and private. A group economy satisfied the needs for organized physical protection and for ongoing social interaction. Strangers shared campfires, and the family
space merged with public areas. With the creation of that practical ad hoc community, however, persisted expectations that such a space, with its particular rules and
responsibilities, would be a transient phenomenon, limited to the emigrant project. Eastern social values and boundaries would reappear once the trip was over. In
emigrant narratives of the experience, however, the geographical danger zone occasionally disrupted social patterns to the extent that the end of the story could not be
played out in the fashion forecasted at the beginning of the narrative. For nineteenth­century women, who drew their identities in large part from their role within the
private sphere, that disruption became a danger in itself. For trail diarist Rebecca Ketcham, the writing of the experience grew to be impossible as the predicated
ending of her story lost its connection in the emigrant space to the subject position she came to inhabit.
Within the borders of the United States at mid­century, the rhetoric of domesticity made the private home an island of safety and serenity presided over by the mother.
Nineteenth­century female writers such as Catharine Beecher, Lydia Sigourney, Lydia Maria Child, Susan Warner, and the popular

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 132

Fanny Fern preached that the individual family home was meant to be a special and secure feminine domain, in which the moral character as well as the physical health
of future generations was formed. Catharine Beecher declared in The American Woman's Home that "the family state ... is the aptest earthly illustration of the
heavenly kingdom, and in it woman is its chief minister" (19). The walls of the home sheltered women from the worldly pursuits of trade and legislature and guarded the
moral well­being of the family as the key to national virtue.
Leaving the eastern enclosure of the home for the wide­open West, then, exposed women to worldly influences and even endangered the sanctity of the family. That
so many women were willing to go seems extraordinary. Historians and critics have speculated that they must have been coerced by insistent husbands, or held captive
to masculine impulses to conquest. 1 From the perspective drawn in this scenario, the outdoor world of men, mud, and moneymaking reached in and swept women
out of their comfortable homes. Pioneer women are thus to be pitied. Another view, however, is possible. Women, according to the contemporary popular press,
were a source of formidable cultural power. The trek westward might be seen, therefore, not just as a dangerous ordeal, but also as an opportunity to recreate what
was culturally perceived as the safe spaces of home within an unbuilt landscape. From this alternative perspective, women were not exactly captives to the all­powerful
male world of commerce and conquest, but rather comprised a cultural Trojan Horse that depended on the outside world of men and machinations for movement.
At the beginning of her 1853 journey, Rebecca Ketcham saw herself in just such a position of power. She aligned herself squarely within a Beecheresque view of
women's role as cultural missionary. In the 1840s, Catharine Beecher organized a legion of female teachers to serve on the frontier, binding Christian duty, womanly
character, and national good: her National Popular Education Board sent dozens of single women westward, starting in 1847. The scheme of exporting women
teachers to the West found support in some of the most popular literature of the day: in Godey's Lady's Book of 1849 editor Sarah Josepha Hale wrote that the "plan
of sending female teachers from the Eastern States to the West" was of "far more importance to the improvement, and, we may add, prosperity of our land, than will
be all the gold of California."2 Hale appealed for continued public dedication to such service:
While the young men are thus going forth to gather gold, will not the benevolent and pious of our land contribute to send forth our young women to disseminate that wisdom
which must be taught, or the gold will prove a curse and not a blessing? (295)

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 133

Hale's metonymic identification of men with gold and women with wisdom seemed to elevate the position of the feminine, and yet reinforced a cultural separation
between the world of men and the realm of women. Wealth, apparently, was a "blessing," if its accumulation in the rough world of commerce could be supported by
the pleasant and gentle influences of teachers, wives, and mothers. The profession of teaching for women, although it may have seemed finally a way for spinster ladies
to support themselves in the workaday world, was hardly separable in contemporary discourse from the protected sanctuary of the home. Hale proclaimed the role as
"teacher of the young" to be woman's ''office, her mission" (355). Out of such rhetoric emerged women like Rebecca Ketcham, for whom teaching in the wilds of
Oregon was a once­in­a­lifetime opportunity.
At first, Ketcham's expectations for that opportunity guided the development of her narrative; as the unaccustomed life of the trail stretched on, however, her vision of
life "at home" in Oregon blurred into an increasing awareness of the interim space. Because a diary kept is as much a record of the efforts to work out a preconceived
narrative structure as it is a shaping of a new one, it is possible in the emigrant's journal to follow two stories at once: the development or disintegration of the forecast
plot of settlement together with the emergence of an independent story of the road. The well­bordered space of the home, so important to the success of women's
mission in the West, broke down in the fluid environment of the trail. Maintaining a separation between home and public areas was a near­impossibility as cooking,
washing, sleeping, and even more personal matters had to be accomplished outdoors within view of other people. In that exposed situation, the social distance
between men and women was diminished and borders between public and private became permeable. A symptom of that permeability was that women's household
chores were open to bargain: for example, women often cooked and baked for people outside their own families in exchange for supplies or draft animals. Or, as in
the case of Rebecca Ketcham, women might be required to provide such domestic services as part of the fee for their passage. The role of women, so well­confined
within walls at home, on the wide­open trail leaked into the world of public commerce.
In this disconcerting moment, when indoors became outdoors and the protecting borders of home were replaced by tentative lines on a map, the story of the road
impinged upon the narrative of progress. Michel Butor compares the movement of travelers through space to a writer's movement across a page: he draws an analogy
between the white space dividing units of meaning in a text and the waiting times between stops on a train route (Butor 1–16). For pioneers driving wagons across the
continent, unlike passengers on a faster trip, that white space could not be ignored. Between the beginning and

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 134

the end lay a vast space punctuated only by the occasional fort or trading post: a space in which significant living was to be done, but for which there was little except
sketchy guidebooks and travelers' tales as patterns. In this unwritten space, journalizing for many was a way of negotiating the experience: even the barest of diaries,
including only mileage and weather, might provide a kind of map, or at least an understandable pattern. The result of such attention to the interim space itself, however,
was to make it signify all out of proportion to the destination. The space of the trail competed with the overarching fantasy of home.
Rebecca Ketcham is one of the most satisfying diarists of the trail, because she wrote copiously not only about the landscape and the schedule of the trail, but also,
and most interestingly, about the personality conflicts that drove people apart. Ketcham was not one of the teachers sent West by the National Board, but her aim
seems to have coincided with the missionary zeal of that organized effort. She had collected donations from friends and relatives to support her trip, an action which
suggests that her trip was considered worthwhile by other people in her community. Her diary offers no clue as to her reasons for undertaking the journey or her plans
for settlement after her arrival. Lillian Schlissel speculates Ketcham may have gone West to escape a soured romance; but this guess, like any other, is unsubstantiated
by the journal (Schlissel 101). Her pious sentiments and firm resolution to continue reflected in her diary, and the record of her eventual teaching occupation in
Oregon, cast her within the general mold of the feminine teacher/activist of the era. After teaching in Clatsop Plains, Oregon for somewhat less than two years,
however, she married an upstanding citizen named Finis E. Mills, a member of the Board of Trustees of the First Presbyterian Society. Within five years after her
marriage, she, Mills, and their two young sons left Oregon for Kentucky, apparently her husband's family home (Ketcham 248).
Ketcham traveled with a small group of people under the authoritarian leadership of William H. Gray, one of the original 1836 missionaries to the Oregon Indians and
a veteran of overland travel. In 1853, Gray was on his third east­west journey across the continent. His prickly and overbearing personality is well­documented in the
diaries of Mary Walker and others who traveled west with him in 1838. 3 Ketcham recorded the general complaints of the 1853 party about his restrictions on food
consumption, baggage weight, and sleeping time. At one point she wrote with horror of Gray's whipping a fifteen­year­old boy for the crime of falling asleep on guard
duty, and the next day with satisfaction noted that Gray himself could scarcely stay awake while driving the team. As a leader, he was opinionated and absolutist, but
his policies were calculated to ensure survival. Indeed, he was an amazing survivor not only of the general hazards of the road such as lack of food and bad water, but
also of Indian attack (he was the sole survivor of a Sioux ambush near Ash Hollow

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 135

on a return trip East in 1837), and of financial ruin, changing occupations several times during his long life. His project that corresponded to Ketcham's trip was the
transport of a large flock of sheep to Oregon. 4 Despite his personality flaws, he was a veteran of the trail and knew how to respond to its rigors. One of Ketcham's
major complaints early on was that he disregarded what she understood to be implicit rules of social behavior, such as protecting women from dangers and inclement
weather.
Perhaps because she perceived herself as part of a powerful social force for good, Ketcham assumed she would receive deferential treatment and that her opinion
would be valuable. Early in her 1853 journal, she frequently reminded herself to follow the example of her Savior, and to remember what it meant to be a Christian,
despite the unending discord around her. The first sign that such a position was not to be hers in Gray's company was his autocratic decision to travel on Sunday
(Ketcham 249). Gray repeatedly disrupted Ketcham's preferred subject position by insisting on a military­style organization for their company (in which she is
decidedly subordinate) instead of recognizing cultural or family patterns that would allow her a more protected role. To her great irritation, Ketcham was required to
cook and clean for the company much more often than she found convenient. Gray refused to make distinctions between people in terms of the amount of work
required, other than assigning men to the animals and women to the care of the camp. She decreased the work she did, however, after finding out that her passage
cost nearly twice as much as that of fellow traveler James Van Renssalaer. She wrote "Charge me one hundred and fifty and then expect me to work my way! I think I
shall find more time to write hereafter" (263). "Working [her] way," apparently, was something Ketcham had not anticipated. The financial transaction of her passage,
in her mind roughly similar to the act of buying a steamboat ticket, should have been over when she paid her fare. The kind of workaday employment Gray demands
was distasteful, for it placed her in the role of servant rather than of paid and protected passenger.
Ketcham's outrage at Gray's dealings with her appeared to be aimed not strictly at gender­based inequality, but rather the idea that she should be dragged out of her
rightful social position and thus denied the protection she felt she deserved. That her ideas about social position were firmly based in her feminine identity became clear
a few days later, when she was left out in the rain during a storm instead of being invited to ride with the other women in the covered carriage. Riding alone when the
rain began, she assumed Gray would stop and let her get into the carriage. Instead, he found her a rubber overcoat, and another woman gave her an old bonnet to
wear so hers would not be ruined. According to Ketcham, she rode in the thunderstorm for two or three hours and through a deep stream that further soaked her
dress until they arrived at a camping place and the rain stopped. In the carriage at last,

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 136

she waited with the others for the ground to dry enough for a fire to be laid and tents to be set up:
So there I sat in the carraige [sic] for more than an hour, my feet and limbs cold as ice, and my face and head like fire. Every time anyone spoke to me I had the greatest difficulty to
keep from crying. If it had really seemed necessary for one to ride, and there had been anyone with me, I could have laughed it off, but to have all the rest riding along in their
carraige, and me taking all that terrible storm alone when there seemed to be not the least necessity for it, I can assure it was a good deal more than I could bear without being very
indignant, and I would not have felt so badly then if Mr. Gray had shown the least disposition to have a fire made and a place for me to change my clothes and be made
comfortable. I was not much afraid of taking cold, but the idea of being treated in so heartless a manner was the main thing. (265)

Alone, ignored, and soaked, Ketcham feels abandoned by the man who, she feels, has contracted to take care of her, and therefore unnecessarily exposed to
dangers. It is important to point out, for the sake of context, that the men in the company regularly got wet in taking care of the sheep and oxen. The rubber coat given
Ketcham during the storm was a man's. For her it was inadequate, and not just because it didn't cover her skirts.
What seemed truly "heartless" to Ketcham is that she felt her womanhood merited more careful treatment. Gray, however, was in service to the exigencies of the
weather, not to social convention. She chose to ignore the practical fact that the ground was too wet to lay a fire or set up a tent, and instead focused on her outrage at
the discomfort to which she is subjected. At home, no doubt, she would have been invited indoors and offered warm clothes while her wet things hung by the fire to
dry. Here on the plains, however, the only "indoors" places available were the transient sleeping tents they bring along; and the availability of those was completely
dependent on the cooperation of the environment. The fire that was the very symbol of hospitality and concern at the heart of the home, could not practically be
kindled. The trail controlled this particular turn in her narrative, yet she attributed the twist to Gray. At this point in Ketcham's journal, Gray came to personify the
dangers placed in her path. Her insistence that he could alter her miserable circumstances if he chose, de­emphasized the role of the weather and the landscape and
assigned control to him. Safe space on the trail, then, depended upon his good graces.
Ketcham thus set up Gray as her protector. His actions in that role, however, were decidedly unsatisfactory. After the ordeal of the rainstorm, Ketcham felt the insult
to her womanhood was compounded by Gray's failure

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 137

to recognize her sacrifice. Her assumptions about the appropriate treatment of women had been challenged, and she began to perceive that she was mistaken about
the social codes that would be operative on the trail. The social differences between men and women at home in New York were simply not recognized in Gray's
company, because he saw no practical purpose in them. The financial inequality revealed by Ketcham's inquiries to James revealed that Gray's attitude with regard to
women was far from worshipful: apparently, he felt ladies were trouble. Far from the reassuring walls of home, Gray was inclined to expose her as much as possible to
the hardships of the outdoors.
Gray's disregard for culturally­defined feminine prerogatives showed itself in his control of such traditionally feminine matters as cooking and nursing. As far as Gray
was concerned, domestic routines and rationales were best left behind for the duration of the journey. He prepared meals himself and restricted portions; and, when
diarrhea or other maladies struck the group, he prescribed and administered remedies. His standard remedy for diarrhea was a diet of stewed fruit and rice; or, in
severe cases, abstention from solid food altogether and a regimen of liquids only. His dictatorial administration of even these helpful cures, however, chafed the
members of his party. In June Ketcham, troubled with constipation, wrote in exasperation:
rice and peaches have been provided for those who had diarhea, and I have eaten of them. I have never before been where I had no choice as to what I could eat, nor the privilege
of saying what I would like. A pretty dear passage across the Rocky Mountains I call it. (280)

For Ketcham, Gray's control over the traditionally feminine arts of food and medicine was much harder to accept than his dictatorship over the more masculine issues
of navigation and care of stock. Her emphasis on her own powerlessness is particularly acute at this point: to have no "choice" or "privilege" in these matters was
particularly galling. Gray's actions actively impinged upon her subject position.
Despite his disregard for the routines of home, William Gray was in fact acting as the head of a family group during this trip: most of the members of the company were
his wife's relatives. The family model, however, clashed disastrously with his management of the group. One of the principal sources of conflict during the trip, and one
that Rebecca Ketcham invoked when she wrote of her disappointment in failing to become part of an harmonious family, was that in spite of Gray's militaristic
discipline, people in the group tended to follow pre­existing family habits rather than accept new rules. Camilla Dix, for example, the spinster sister, was forever doing
younger sister Martha Godley's work; the Godley boys were pampered by their mother, and the

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 138

matriarch Sarah Dix was accustomed to unquestioned authority on matters of health and cooking. Gray, however, was in the business of moving people and stock
across the continent as quickly and as safely as possible, and he had no patience with those who shirked what he defined as obligation or who objected to policies he
understood as necessary. He readily whipped his fifteen­year­old nephew, Henry Godley, for falling asleep on duty. Family feelings were irrelevant beside the
demands of the road. Ketcham writes that she was disappointed in the rapport of the company: "I had expected we would all cling together and to be one family, but
we are anything else. I presume I shall have some heartache after I get there, before I get settled" (266). "Family" and "settled" at mid­journey were words that still
inhabited the preconceived narrative of her trip; but at this juncture she perceived that the story was becoming more complicated than she expected. Significantly,
however, settlement, coterminous with happiness, was yet the implied end.
In order to make that end possible, Ketcham suspended her own judgment about Gray's behavior. She excused his abuses of power by citing the different space of
the trail, no longer blaming him for the vicissitudes of the weather, but rather assigning him a mediating role between the dangerous transitional space of the road and
the safety represented by home and hearth. The "heartache" brought on by his autocratic authority and the subsequent disintegration of the "family" on the road would,
in her mind, be restored after the ordeal of the passage was behind her. Even William Gray, she considered, might be different within his own home. She resolved to
suspend judgment on Gray's behavior until the space of the journey was done, and recognizable frameworks of home reestablished:
I believe it will not do to judge of character on this journey as one would anywhere else. The incidents or circumstances here develop character as nothing else can, and if
allowances are not made, we cannot come to correct decisions. At all events, I don't think I can understand Mr. Gray till I see him at home. (271)

In trying to understand Gray's seemingly inappropriate behavior, Ketcham reasoned that the rules of conduct were not the same as "at home." This suspension of
judgment is an important conjunction between the narrative of expectation and the narrative of the road in her journal, for it marked the place from which she loosened
her own control on the imaginative shaping of events, and began to rely almost entirely on Gray's mediation of her experience.
As Ketcham's diary progressed, it revealed a growing alliance with Gray and his authority. Indeed, the narrative began to depend on his actions rather than hers:
Ketcham became a commentator on Gray's actions rather than the

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 139

recorder of her own emotions. Near the end of the trip, she even admitted that she favored Gray over the seemingly more congenial men and women in the party: "I
do not know why it is I always feel inclined to side with men like him against everyone else. Still I believe my judgment tells me he is far from being the only one in the
fault in the difficulty they have had" (352). She began to see other members of the company as disrupters of the codes laid down by Gray, instead of the other way
round. Gray, as the arbiter of the narrative imposed by the journey, took precedence over the increasingly inappropriate actors still preoccupied with maintaining the
standards of Ithaca. Despite the hardships he imposed in terms of food and rest, Ketcham reassured herself in her journal that he must have had reasons for his
behavior. After one river crossing where the sheep were nearly beyond control, she wrote: "I am sorry for the man anyway. He has a terrible temper to control, and
with so much care on his mind, so much to irritate and vex him, I don't wonder he acts like a crazy man" (375). Without admitting it, Ketcham transformed Gray in her
diary from a "crazy man," one whose actions are inappropriate, to a man whose behavior is at least understandable.
In her journal, this suspension of judgment and dependence upon Gray as arbiter of the road extended from personality even to features of the landscape. Everything
she previously knew and understood almost instinctively became suspect. She wrote with surprise about the deceptive nature of the landscape for Ithaca­trained eyes.
Height, distance, even expectations of weather patterns were not to be trusted. Camped on the Platte River, she wrote: "It is surprising to see how easily one is
deceived in the distance here on these plains, and in size of objects. I have a great many times mistaken a crow some distance before us for a man" (279). This illusion
of perspective, commonly reported by overland emigrants, was paralleled in Ketcham's writing by a certain disjunction of expectations. Her account of Fort Kearney,
for example, exposed the vast difference between her idea of what a fort looked like and the way this one presented itself: "We saw no mounted guns, nor in reality
anything that looked like a fort except the dress of those we saw about" (274). Gray was also of the opinion that Fort Kearney fell far short of its name. Ketcham
recorded that he commented that it looked like "the commanding officer liked strong drink better than anything else" (274). In other situations, Ketcham's tentative
views of the environment gave way to those of the trailhardened Gray. About Independence Rock, a landmark near the Platte on which emigrants traditionally carved
their names and dates, she wrote:
It is said to cover an area of 5 acres. I [think] that is correct, but that it is four hundred feet high I doubt very much. Of course we cannot judge of distances nor heights as we
could at home, but thinking steadily of what we

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 140
have passed, and comparing this with the other given heights, I doubt it very much. (348)

The qualifiers she added to the statement undermined her empirical defense of her opinion. The superfluous repetition of "I doubt ... very much" especially neutralized
her initial tone of confidence. Similar hesitations dogged her descriptions of other parts of the landscape. Describing the landscape around Independence Rock earlier
in the paragraph, she repeated the word "seem" three times in rapid succession, as if her view of things were at best a hazy and ill­remembered recollection of a dream:
We seemed to be in a large prairie, ... with great mountains of rocks seemingly thrown up from the earth. ... As we passed around the ends of them, we could see all around. They
appeared strangely enough to me. These chains of mountains seemed to be on every side of us, and we could see no way of getting out of the valley. ... (348)

William Gray, of course, was her guide out of the valley, and he did not seem to be lost or confused for a moment. Over the course of the journey, she became a keen
listener to him as he drove the carriage, noting that she was learning much from him about driving the team, identifying flora and fauna, understanding Indian behavior,
and even about writing in a journal. With her acceptance of a distinction between home and trail, she seemed also to have accepted Gray as an authority.
Near the end of the journey, she had learned so well to disregard her own instincts that she occasionally defied common sense. For example, despite nothing that "If
we had been at home [we] would have expected rain" (383), she made no preparations for the wetting that followed within a few minutes. This time, she and the other
women, who had been preparing to dry clothes (!), climbed into the carriage and waited out the rain, which shortly "began to come down in large drops" (383). In the
context of her changed frame of reference, the rain was a surprise, proof not that her Eastern sensibilities were right, but rather evidence of the unpredictability of
Western weather. This episode, although recorded without commentary in her diary, served to underline her complete subjection to Gray. She assumed that her own
opinion, even about domestic routines learned at home in New York, was valueless. Lack of confidence in her own powers of discernment seemed to undermine
Ketcham's ability to take care of herself. In order to take advantage of Gray's protective powers, she had to give up the self­sufficient attitude that led her to make the
trip as a single woman in the first place.
Perhaps because of the fact that she placed herself at the mercy of forces outside her control, Ketcham's diary revealed no sense of personal insecurity.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 141

She felt so confident in Gray's skill and judgment, in fact, that the occasional skittishness of the other women irritated her. For example, when the elderly Mrs. Dix
requested permission to avoid a dangerous river crossing with the wagons and ride instead as a passenger on the ferry, Gray became angry and this time Ketcham,
surprisingly, was on his side: "Mr. Gray did not like it at all that the request was made. He likes to have us have confidence in him and let him manage his own affairs
without a word of interference, and I think it would be very much for the happiness of this company if Mrs. Dix and Mrs. Godley would cease to interfere as they
do" (357). In contrast to her earlier outrage about the stony treatment she received in the rainstorm, Ketcham was surprisingly complicit in Gray's refusal to make
allowances for age and gender. Mrs. Dix's request showed a preference for protection from the elements and for organized public transport (a shadow of the social
structures they had left behind) over the exposure to wild water Gray's plan offered. Such a preference seemed entirely reasonable for an elderly lady, accustomed to
social conveniences. Her request, however, revealed Mrs. Dix had not relinquished the life of the home for the life of the trail, and that revelation enabled Ketcham to
feel superior. She had realigned herself completely, from representative of Eastern manners to virtual deputy of frontier behavior. The "heartache" she expected to
suffer through seemed to have dulled as her expectations were deferred.
Just as her own sense of loss had lost its sting, the griefs of others in Ketcham's journal were subject to a William Gray­styled reduction. Like many other emigrants,
she counted graves when they appeared by the roadside, 5 but she did not record very many (a surprising lack only one year after the cholera epidemics on the trail in
1851 and 1852); and those she did write about she suspected of merely appearing to be graves:
Before this morning we had seen five graves; today we have seen four, making nine. Mr. Gray said some person who was considered reliable had made a statement which was
published for a fact in regard to the graves seen on this route, which we account for in this way. (The number was very great—I forget what it was, and beside, he said what was
singular, no grass grew on these graves.) We have noticed all along long, narrow holes in the ground which look like a grave sunken in. But as we leave such an one wherever we
camp, we take it for granted those we see are made in the same way. Indeed, we are sure of it from the signs around. They take a spade and dig such a hole to make a fire in. ...
when it rains upon the ashes we leave, an alkali is formed which prevents the grass from growing upon them. (269)

Ketcham's phrasing here tells a great deal about her increasing separation from Easterners and growing allegiance to Gray's frame of reference. Her qualifications

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 142

of the report ("considered reliable" and "published for a fact") served to underline the naivete of the Eastern readers who took such reports at face value. The
sentimental horror of thousands of graves lining the route became for her a picture drawn by overinspired writers for a gullible public. Her own sketch of the
experience was drawn by William Gray. That Ketcham repeated his explanation of the apparent "graves" in her journal not only eliminated the possibility for her own
emotional response, but also implied an emerging gulf between the Gray­Ketcham unit and the imaginary mass of uninitiated Easterners. At this point in the journal, the
twin focus on the home behind and destination beyond blurred: far from wishing herself at the end of her wanderings, Ketcham lamented the haste at which the group
traveled and stated her desire to return someday to better enjoy the scenery. The geographical expanse that for her was originally merely a space of transition had
become a place with its own logic and its own particular meanings.
That logic and meaning, however, depended entirely on Gray's interpretation. From the beginning of her journal to the end, Ketcham's outlook changed from that of an
independent woman out to fulfill a cultural mandate to that of a follower whose own subjectivity depended upon the authority of her captain. His abrupt departure near
the Columbia River when the party was still weeks from their destination, then, left her bewildered and afraid. Although the most significant dangers of the passage
were behind them, Gray's abandonment seemed to Ketcham to be inexcusable. In her journal she complained:
Mr. Gray was very much tried, but I cannot think he did quite right in leaving us as he has. I felt badly enough when he went away. ... I have not felt so much anxiety and dread on
the whole trip as I do now; feel so entirely unprotected. (400)

At this point on the trail, the only significant geographical hazard left was the passage down the Columbia, a venture handled by ferryman entrepreneurs on the river
itself. Local Indians were interested in trade, not attack. Yet, the departure of William Gray stripped her of the sense of security her dependence on his judgment
allowed. Her feeling of exposure at this point seemed to arise from the disjunction between her trail­adjusted point of view and her renewed need, near her long­
planned destination, to recover meaningful social structures. Having ceased to regard the trip as white space to be endured between the meaningful loci of Eastern
home and Destination West, she had begun to recognize significance in the landscape itself. Without Gray as her interpreter of that landscape, she was suddenly
without referent in an unfamiliar syntax. The geographical isolation she enjoyed and wished to linger within just a few pages earlier became not only a threat, but a
barrier to the reassumption of her accustomed position within a social grammar.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 143

Without a secure social or geographical place, Ketcham seemed also to have lost her ability to find a safe subject position from which to write. Shortly after Gray's
departure, but before the end of her journey, the entries in her diary ceased. Her angry and self­assured ''I shall find more time to write hereafter" at the beginning of
the trip (263), a statement which made the act of writing a defense against the unwelcome space created by Gray, belonged to a completely different writer. The
Rebecca Ketcham writing, or not writing, at the end was not powerful enough to erect those kinds of defenses. The pages she was so determined to fill at the
beginning of her journey despite Gray's demand on her time were left blank at the end of her book, before the end of the trail. The frameworks of home still unbuilt,
she dropped her narrative altogether. The ending of her journal, forecast from the very beginning as the reestablishment of familiar structures and values, was unwritten.
Her foreshadowed observations of William Gray at home came to nothing, and her dreamt­of success as a teacher and bringer of civilization in the frontier regions of
Oregon went unrecorded. The alien space of the trail bound her so effectively to authority other than her own that, when she found herself unprotected in that space,
her own ability to muster authorial power ended. She left her written self as Gray left her: on the road.
Rebecca Ketcham's slide from self­sufficient, confident young teacher to fearful emigrant follows a delicate border between protection and exposure. The conflict
between the need for group security against dangers in the landscape and the desire for individual protection against ambiguities in the social sphere engendered
difficulties for emigrants, especially for women, who by mid­century presided over the cultural sanctuary of the home. Although Ketcham suspended judgment about
human behavior on the trail and thus was able to fit into the military­style order Gray demanded, she planned to teach in Oregon when she arrived, to help reconstruct
the stable social framework that gave special power to her feminine position. The process of her movement through the alien space of the trail, however, changed her
options. What she had assumed to be the trivial space of the journey imprinted itself on her writing in a way that made the completion of her story impossible. Like the
furniture jettisoned from wagons and left to bleach in the sun, the fantasy of domesticity was at once fragile and difficult to move. Forced to condense both physical
and intangible components of home into the most basic elements, emigrants sometimes found their dreams of home replaced by an unending sense of uprootedness.
Notes
1. For the most extensive literary analysis of pioneer women's narratives, see Annette Kolodny, The Land Before Her (Chapel Hill: The University of North Carolina

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 144

Press, 1984). Lillian Schlissel's historical collection, Women's Diaries of the Westward Journey (New York: Schocken Books, 1982), is now a classic. Other
studies include Julie Roy Jeffrey, Frontier Women (New York: Hill and Wang, 1979); Sandra L. Myres, Westering Women and the Frontier Experience 1800–
1915 (Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1982); and Susan Armitage and Elizabeth Jameson, eds. The Women's West (Norman, Oklahoma: University
of Oklahoma Press, 1987).
2. 38 (April 1849): 294. For information about women teachers in the West, see Polly Kaufman, Women Teachers on the Frontier (New Haven: Yale University
Press, 1984). Godey's Lady's Book addresses the subject of women teachers in two issues: April, 1849: 294–295 and May, 1850: 354–355.
3. See Clifford Drury, First White Women over the Rockies 3 vols. (Glendale, CA: Arthur H. Clark, 1963). Mary Walker's diary is reproduced in vol. 2.
4. The movement of the sheep was a frustrating project that nevertheless succeeded until the very end of the journey, when Gray was tying up the boat containing the
animals at the mouth of the Columbia River. A sudden storm pulled the boat back out into the waves and capsized it, drowning the entire flock. He had mortgaged his
farm to buy them. See Ketcham 240–245.
5. Lillian Schlissel calls women emigrants in particular "actuaries of the road" for the prevalence of running totals in their journals. For more on this diaristic
phenomenon, see Schlissel, Women's Diaries of the Westward Journey, 15.
References
Anderson, Benedict. Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and Spread of Nationalism. London: Verso, 1983.
Beecher, Catharine and Harriet Beecher Stowe. The American Woman's Home, or, Principles of Domestic Science. 1869; rpt. Hartford, Connecticut: The
Stowe­Day Foundation, 1991.
Bercovitch, Sacvan. The American Jeremiad. Madison: University of Wisonsin Press, 1978.
Bushman, Richard L. The Refinement of America. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1992.
Butor, Michel. "Travel and Writing." Mosaic 8:1 (Fall 1976): 1–16.
Child, Lydia Maria. The Mother's Book. 1831; rpt. Old Saybrook, Connecticut: The Globe Pequot Press, 1992.
Drury, Clifford M. First White Women over the Rockies. 3 vols. Glendale, CA: Arthur H. Clark, 1963.
Faragher, John Mack. Women and Men on the Overland Trail. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1979.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 145

Hale, Sarah Josepha. "Editor's Page." Godey's Lady's Book. April 1849: 294–295 and May, 1850: 354–355.
Kaufman, Polly Welts. Women Teachers on the Frontier. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1984.
Ketcham, Rebecca. "From Ithaca to Clatsop Plains: Miss Ketcham's Journal of Travel." Eds. Leo M. Kaiser and Priscilla Knuth. Oregon Historical Quarterly 42
(1961): 237–87, 337–402.
Kolodny, Annette. The Land Before Her: Fantasy and Experience of the American Frontiers, 1630–1860. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press,
1984.
Schlissel, Lillian. Women's Diaries of the Westward Journey. New York: Schocken Books, 1982.
Stowe, Harriet Beecher. House and Home Papers. Boston: Ticknor & Fields, 1865.
Unruh, John D., Jr. The Plains Across: The Overland Emigrants and the Trans­Mississippi West, 1840–1860. Chicago: University of Illinois Press, 1979.
Urry, John. The Tourist Gaze: Leisure and Travel in Contemporary Societies. London and Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications, 1990.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 147

Safe Space and Storytelling: Willa Cather's Shadows on the Rock
Linda K. Karell
The tension between the desire for home, for synchrony, for sameness, and the realization of the repressions and violence that make home, harmony, sameness imaginable, and that
enforce it, is made clear in the movement of the narrative by very careful and effective reversals which do not erase the positive desire for unity, for Oneness, but destabilize and
undercut it.
—Biddy Martin and Chandra Talpade Mohanty

The above epigraph is drawn from Biddy Martin and Chandra Talpade Mohanty's essay, "Feminist Politics: What's Home Got to Do With It?" 1 In that now well­
known essay, Martin and Mohanty examine Minnie Bruce Pratt's autobiographical narrative, "Identity: Skin Blood Heart," in order to theorize ''the power and appeal
of 'home'" (191). Martin and Mohanty's essay investigates how the desire for "home" and its subsequent constructions within the various communities inhabited by
Pratt always exist in tense relationship, buttressed by the illusion of safely demarcated spaces, and contested by the realization that others' stories must be violently
suppressed in order to maintain that illusion. Throughout their essay, Martin and Mohanty question the desirability of "home" in relation to feminist and lesbian feminist
theory and as a component of Pratt's narrative itself. Defining what they mean by "home," Martin and Mohanty argue that
"Being home" refers to the place where one lives within familiar, safe, protected boundaries; "not being home" is a matter of realizing that home was an illusion of coherence and
safety based on the exclusion of specific histories of oppression and resistance, the repression of differences even within oneself. (196)

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 148

The relationships between concepts of "home," "safe space," and "storytelling" are multiple, but for the purposes of this essay, I want to suggest that safe spaces,
whatever their form, designate "home." In other words, to be ''home" or to be "at home" always connotes a form of safe space. That space may be material, such as
the house in which one grew up and felt secure, or it may be psychological, such as a particularly familiar or comfortable pattern of emotional responses. For women,
however, the physical and psychological safe spaces that resonate as "homes" have often been linked to women's bodily, sexual, or artistic containment and violation
within those structures. In my reading, the critical challenge of Martin and Mohanty's analysis is its insistence that "home" relies upon the relentless exclusion of
difference for its maintenance. As Martin and Mohanty implicitly argue by their use of Pratt's autobiographical narrative as an example of their insights, the stories
women tell about their lives can disrupt a belief that the safe spaces of home can be had without a concomitant cost to the women who inhabit them or, for that matter,
to those others excluded from those homes. Without denying the psychological necessity, the "positive desire," for safe space, unheard or unacknowledged stories
hold the potential to undermine and sometimes even shatter "home's" claims to security and protection from difference. For women, then, it is important to consider the
wide­ranging implications of what we call safe space. Is safe space desirable? Is it even possible and, if so, under what circumstances? In this chapter I argue that
constructions of "home"—and thus of safe space—are invariably tenuous; they are often desired for their promise of safety, but they are simultaneously always
vulnerable to disruption. Desire for a safe space to call home that is coupled with a realization that home is vulnerable and tenuous is the central tension in Willa
Cather's 1931 novel, Shadows on the Rock, and it is through Cather's use of storytelling that we witness the disruption of safe space. As critics have already noted,
there are a range of stories within the pages of Shadows on the Rock: legends of historical saints and pioneers, tales of warring Indians and devout religious explorers,
and recounted memories of historical figures all interweave with the narrative of the daily comings and goings of the Canadian settlers. Susan Rosowski stresses
storytelling's unifying and universalizing potential when she argues that each character in Shadows on the Rock "participates in rituals of storytelling, by which individual
lives are joined to timeless legends" (179). But in Shadows on the Rock, seldom do any two characters tell the same story. The discrepancies between stories
steadfastly resist a single coherent reading; stories contradict each other and simultaneously work to question the very assurance of home they are called upon to
create. The stories in Shadows on the Rock, their content and the manner in which they are told, enact the novel's internal debate between the liberating potential of
safe spaces that signify "home," and the threats of women's socialization, erasure, and silence that structure those homes.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 149

Moreover, in Shadows on the Rock, race as well as gender impact which stories can be told and by whom, and whose stories will be believed. In fact, Cather's
insistence on the importance of the position from which one speaks in this novel foregrounds differences from the universal and insists upon the impossibility of stability.
Cather mounts her largest investigation of universality with her examination of religious space as a potentially safe space for women. Here too, however, while the
text's representations of religious spaces reveal an obsession with coherence and stability, the contradictions between those representations simultaneously force the
reader, through the characters' storytelling and through the content of the stories they tell, to acknowledge that coherence and stability may come at a cost to women
and are highly tenuous. What is up for grabs in Shadows on the Rock, in other words, is the possibility and the desire(ability) of an uncontested, universally human
story.
In addition to the resonance that the metaphor of home has for my reading of the many layers of Shadows on the Rock—the surface text, the subtext, the multiple and
often contradicting stories—the safety promised by a stable home is apparent in Cather's writing process and in the novel's reception. In other words, the desire for
safe space figures in specific ways in Cather's attempts to control interpretations of her life as well as in the reputation for being a marginally canonical writer that has
stuck to Cather relentlessly through the years. Written when Cather was fifty­eight years old and nearer to the end of her career than to its beginning, Shadows on the
Rock, like the rest of her late fiction, has been consistently considered inferior to her early novels. In fact, to the degree that Cather is valued as a canonical writer, she
is valued for a reductive selection of work, one that emphasizes her earlier pioneer novels. Interpretations of her work based on these novels frequently judge Cather's
art to be most significant when most readily digestible as a universal story. In Cather, Canon, and the Politics of Reading (1992), Deborah Carlin argues that "What
designates [her] early novels as canonical then is their appeal to reading publics as stories already inscribed within the national imagination. ... What is identifiably
canonical within Cather's nearly fifty years of fiction writing then is, paradoxically, a small number of texts that embody the expansive West of the American
imagination" (7–8). Certainly the reason for this truncated critical assessment is not a lack of range on Cather's part. Throughout her writing career, which spanned the
length of her adult life, Cather wrote prolifically and diversely. Her writing covers a wide range of subjects, and she experimented with dramatically different
composing processes and literary styles. But the novels that have secured Cather's literary reputation, O Pioneers!, My Antonia, and Death Comes for the
Archbishop, for example, have often been read as transcendently "human" stories that resonate across time. Shadows on the Rock shatters this promise of a
familiar—and consoling—story of nation­building.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 150

Working on behalf of the universal, critics have praised Cather as an intuitive artist, one who possesses a "naturalness so great that one is tempted to think of her
almost as not a writer at all," since this naturalness "lies far below the surface of conscious endeavor" (Tennant ix). As feminist scholarship has shown, however,
crediting a female author with intuitive greatness at the expense of rationality satisfies cultural expectations about what and how a woman should write and effectively
bars her from creative agency: not masters themselves, women are mastered by their intuition, which proves more capable than their intellects. At the risk of belaboring
what I hope is the obvious, even a quick skim through Cather's early non­fiction writing will severely tax any reading of her as solely an intuitive writer, rather than as
one who is consciously directing (if not fully in conscious control of) her writing energies and abilities. Scores of her articles, entertainment and literature reviews, and
cultural commentaries reveal a young woman very much engaged with the cultural questions of her time and carefully and deliberately defining for herself the potential
of art and the role of the female artist. 2
Gendered expectations for women's writing in America have allowed critics to construct a Cather whose literary works uphold interpretations of America's colonizing
history as justified, even divinely ordained. Cather's focus on Westward expansionism through her positive representation of the pioneer, especially of the pioneer
woman, her frequent emphasis on landscape and on what has been interpreted as "the archetypal and eternally human," as well as "that effortless symbolic quality that
is Cather's distinctive note" (Rose 132, 128), mesh well with historical renderings of America's past as the discovery and morally sanctioned occupation of a "new"
land. In contrast to her contemporary Gertrude Stein's radical linguistic experimentation, for instance, the placid surface of Cather's novels, her focus on exteriority
rather than interiority, her insistence on precise word choice, on traditional grammar and syntactical structure in order to render meaning exactly, have all been invoked
to uphold critical readings of Cather as conservative and apolitical. Although Cather has sometimes been dismissed as simplistic, naive, or escapist in the literary
celebration of Modernism's self­conscious complexity, many critics who argue for Cather's ''greatness" agree that she is able to achieve anonymity, thus transcending
gender, race, and class.3 Cather's writing has been judged most aesthetically pleasing when least politically disruptive, helping to create what Carlin describes as "the
early critical formula that Cather's novels climax in the twenties, then spiral downward in a trajectory of despair, decline, and artistic degeneration" (16). The critical
silence that envelops Shadows on the Rock consistently avoids confronting a Cather who is more politically engaged than most readings of her earlier novels suggest.
We can see this engagement in her essay, "On Shadows on the Rock," where Cather was openly skeptical of the desire for ceaseless stability that so structures her
novel: "There another age

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 151

persists. There ... I caught something new to me; a kind of feeling about life and human fate that I could not accept, wholly, but which I could not but admire" (15).
Her description is evenhanded, suggesting that the premise of stability that permeates her novel was not only "new" to her, but also somewhat unconvincing. While we
need not read Cather's retrospective statement of her intentions as fixing the meaning of her text, her statement intervenes in the conflation of author and text that
upholds readings of Cather as either transcendent or naive, and it shows her to be quite able to tolerate, even to admire, ambiguity.
Shadows on the Rock is plotted to create the "illusion of coherence" (Martin and Mohanty 180). The novel's structure of repetition emphasizes stability: set during
1697–1698 in French Quebec, Canada, Shadows on the Rock spans one year of twelve­year­old Cécile Auclair's life. The seasonal arrival of ships carrying the
supplies from France necessary for survival is a comforting repetition, as are the characters' daily rituals of labor, religious observation, food preparation, and
storytelling. However, the atmosphere of certainty that predictable events and cyclical time generate within the text is almost immediately suspect, when challenges to
the possibility of stability erupt. The rock upon which Quebec is built is equally a symbol of stability and a reminder of vulnerability. Buffeted by "the ever­changing
northern light and weather," Quebec is bounded by a forest which keeps difference—and the terrors it is believed to contain—perpetually within view:
[O]n the West, behind the town [of Quebec], the forest stretched no living man knew how far. That was the dead, sealed world of the vegetable kingdom, an uncharted continent
choked with interlocking trees, living, dead, half­dead, their roots in bogs and swamps, strangling each other in a slow agony that had lasted for centuries. The forest was
suffocation, annihilation; there European man was quickly swallowed up in silence, distance, mould, black mud, and the stinging swarms of insect life that bred in it. ... The river
was the one thing that lived, moved, glittered, changed,—a highway along which man could travel, taste the sun and open air, feel freedom, join their fellows, reach the open sea ...
the world, even! (6–7)

Representing the forest as living terror may be consonant with historical perceptions of the vast unknown North American continent at this period of colonization, but
something in addition to the quest for psychological or historical realism is also registered here. In a text that so relentlessly insists on the need for a stability possible
only through the absence of change, this description of the forested landscape of Quebec posits exactly the opposite: changelessness is terrifying stagnation, while the
movement of the river offers life because it changes. Even at this early point in the novel, with her description of Quebec's forest,

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 152

Cather contradicts her characters' desires for a secure place to call home and begins crafting a rich subtext that will continue throughout the novel.
An equally disruptive element of that subtext is the racial difference that poses a threat to the colonists' new home in Quebec. Cather's description of the forest is a
New World nightmare filled with repulsion and dread. It is also a screen onto which fears of racial difference are projected as a chaos that threatens to annihilate the
French settlers. Besides breeding insects—or perhaps, the paragraph suggests, as an example of them—the forest is home for Native peoples. Unlike her
representations of Native Americans in Death Comes for the Archbishop, in Shadows on the Rock Cather deploys predictable stereotypes and records a historical
prejudice. For example, Cécile "liked to think of things of their own in Canada," and some of the stories that fascinate her are about the "wonderful" and "terrible"
"tortures the Jesuit missionaries endured at the hands of the Iroquois, in those savage, interminable forests" (101, 102). Although Cather's emphasis is on Cécile's
adolescent romanticization of suffering (Cécile's father, for instance, wonders ''whether there has not been a good deal of misplaced heroism in the Canadian
missions,—a waste of rare qualities which did nobody any good" [155]), Cécile's romanticization of the missionaries' tribulations requires the opposition of a savage
tribe of Indians. During his visit with Cécile and her father, one of the novel's contemporary male religious figures, Father Hector, also portrays the Indians as entirely
alien and malicious in his story of another male religious leader's encounters with the Hurons: "Everything about the savages and their mode of life was utterly repulsive
and horrible to him; their filth, their indecency, their cruelty" (151). Throughout Shadows on the Rock, Native people are generally savages, occasionally cannibals
and, like children, are blissfully unaware of their uncivilized ways, requiring the salvation of the Jesuit priests. In the above passage, Cather projects this paralyzing fear
of racial difference onto the forest, and she records the European desire to contain otherness elsewhere in order to maintain safe—white—homes.
For a transplanted white European community, the racial difference represented by the Indians in Shadows on the Rock is a constant threat to the colonizing project
and the European definitions of home that the novel privileges. For Cécile's mother, Madame Auclair, the Indians are the chaos her homemaking is aimed at excluding:
"Without order our lives would be disgusting, like those of the poor savages. At home, in France, we have learned to do all these things in the best way, and we are
conscientious, and that is why we are called the most civilized people in Europe..." (24). The home Madame attempts to leave Cécile as her legacy is comprised of
innumerable acts of ritualistic ordering designed to "make the new life [in Quebec] as much as possible like the old [life in France]" (23). From the start, however, the
unity of their home is undone as we see these characters' homes built upon the denied or devalued homes of others: despite the unceasing ordering that is

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 153

Cécile's maternal inheritance, the presence of the Native peoples and the forest that is their home remain as mute stereotypes in a text that can neither fully suppress
nor completely acknowledge their presence. That presence of a hostile and alien culture is constructed as an attempt to justify Madame and Cécile's domestic ordering
even as it condemns their efforts to failure.
If the domestic sphere fails to provide women with safe space, then what about the spiritual sphere? Cather gives her fullest treatment of the contradictions created by
conflicting stories and their implications for safe space for women, in her representation of Jeanne Le Ber, the intensely ambiguous female religious figure at the center
of the text. Le Ber is the character through whom Cather explores the potential of religious spaces to offer safe homes to women. Le Ber is a nexus of competing
stories, a series of contradicting interpretations; her "meaning" depends upon who is telling the story, to whom, and where. Le Ber first enters the text as a legend when
Cécile, who is repeatedly transfixed by romanticized stories of female religious figures, reviews the "whole story" in her mind (130). The public story currently
circulating throughout Quebec tells of a recent visit to Le Ber by angels who fix her broken spinning wheel. This story renders Le Ber miraculous and mysterious—a
spiritual authority as suspect as it is liberating for women. It is significant that, despite appearances, Le Ber does not speak for herself. Initially, the words ascribed to
Le Ber are part of Cécile's memory of the legend of Le Ber, prompted by the recent news of the angels' visit. Later, Pierre Charron reports Le Ber's words, along
with his interpretation of their meaning, in the stories he tells about her to Cécile's father.
At seventeen, as the legend Cécile reviews goes, Le Ber imitates the domestic retreat of the medieval mystic, Catherine of Siena, isolating herself in her father's house,
speaking only to a personal attendant. At the end of ten years of religious seclusion, Le Ber uses her dowry to have a three­tiered cell built behind the church's high
altar where she continues to live in isolation, embroidering altar cloths, knitting for the poor, and steadfastly observing her religious convictions. In Felicitous Space,
Judith Fryer claims Le Ber's three­tiered cell is a literary example of "the female discovery of felicitous space" (50), and the public legend Cécile lovingly reviews
includes Le Ber's ecstatic description of that space: "[M]y room is my terrestrial paradise; it is my center; it is my element. There is not any place more delightful, or
more nourishing for me, not any castle, not any palace, which is more agreeable to me. I prefer my cell over the rest of the universe" [my translation] (136). The earthly
paradise Le Ber creates specifically excludes heterosexual marriage and motherhood. If we recall Martin and Mohanty's theory of "home," we see that with Le Ber,
Cather excludes precisely those institutions which traditionally structure domestic homes for women, and which will entirely define Cécile's eventual home with Pierre
Charron, Le Ber's girlhood suitor. In this instance,

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 154

the exclusion of "specific histories of oppression" (Martin and Mohanty 196) is a force of resistance, a method of struggle that can redefine home as a site of potential
liberation for women. Yet, whether or not we agree that Le Ber's space is felicitous, she gains it by intensifying precisely the domestic space she rejects in order to
establish her new home. In other words, Le Ber embraces metaphorically those institutions she rejects physically: she is still quite literally "within her own chamber
within her father's house" (132).
Although the religious space Le Ber occupies replicates in many aspects the domestic space she rejects, her isolation becomes a focus for the novel's investigation of
the consequences for women of female resistance through religious devotion. Le Ber's retreat is founded on female isolation, which the novel represents simultaneously
as Le Ber's "entombment" and as the cause for public "conversation and wonder" (134). As the story describing how Le Ber's spinning wheel was repaired "was told
and retold with loving exaggeration," it becomes an "incomparable gift":
The people have loved miracles for so many hundred years, not as proof or evidence, but because they are the actual flowering of desire. In them vague worship and devotion of
the simple­hearted assumes a form. From being a shapeless longing, it becomes a beautiful image; a dumb rapture becomes a melody that can be remembered and repeated; and the
experience of a moment, which might have been a lost ecstasy, is made into an actual possession and can be bequeathed to another. (137)

Judith Fryer discusses this paragraph as "a description of the process of writing" and describes Jeanne Le Ber as a legend (330–331). This rhetorically elusive
paragraph, much as Le Ber herself is elusive, can certainly be a description of writing, but it also describes storytelling and its rewards. And like stories, the
paragraph's meaning exceeds even these interpretations, transforming and taking up other meanings. "Flowering of desire" is at once desire's culmination, and the
blossoming forth of more intense desire. Desire for a stable form infuses the stories of Le Ber, prompting their retellings, creating the miracle that is the story. Cather
may want a stable form for her narrative authority, but her desire for a spiritual home that will produce permanence in the stories she tells is undone by precisely the
desire motivating the stories. The "actual possession" is inherently unstable because while bequeathable in retellings, it will also change with the inevitable revisions and
exaggerations of retellings. The image and the melody signify longing and rapture transformed by desire, but simultaneously represent their loss, the desire for their
return, and the impossibility of their fulfillment as "an actual possession."
With the public legend of Le Ber, Cather reiterates the familiar apotheosis of woman into worshipped icon. The legend of Le Ber seems to posit religious

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 155

space as a site of authentic power for women, one outside the prescribed heterosexual marketplace. Yet a closer examination of the legend, coupled with Charron's
stories, counters that possibility with increasing ambivalence. Filtered through Cécile's perspective, the public legend of Le Ber emphasizes her mystery as well as her
resistance to an expected trajectory of development that would end in marriage to Pierre Charron. Her mystery depends upon her elusiveness, and her resistance has
required it. Succeeding stories about Le Ber, told from rejected suitor Charron's perspective, present the female recluse as a failed woman in a religious exile of
despair. His stories about her deemphasize her mysteriousness and undercut the possibility of conscious agency, pointing instead to female socialization as the source
of her devotion: "If the venerable Bourgeoys [sic] had not got hold of that girl in her childhood and overstrained her with fasts and penances, she would be a happy
mother today, not sleeping in a stone cell like a prisoner" (177). Ultimately Cather resists final authority over Le Ber's meaning; the reader must sift through
contradictory stories to determine Le Ber's status in the text. In this way, Cather cautions against claims of religious authority or transcendence as methods of defining
autonomous subject positions for women.
In fact, whoever the teller is, the stories told about Le Ber show her performing, with alternating success and failure, depending upon the gendered expectations of the
storyteller, an expected femininity, one assumed by the characters to be knowable and stable. Her performances, when filtered through her storytellers' expectations,
shape the dramatically contradictory interpretations of her. That gender does indeed play a substantial role in interpretation is evident when Cather shows that Le Ber's
public performances of femininity were successful during her rare public appearances in church. The spectacle of Le Ber generates public fascination and approval,
and "On such occasions people used to come in from the neighboring parishes for a glimpse of that slender figure, the richest heiress in Canada, clad in grey serge,
kneeling on the floor near the altar, while her family, in furs and velvet, sat in chairs in another part of the church" (133). However, if Le Ber is able to resist cultural
pressure to accommodate conventional female subject positions, she is nonetheless constrained by those subject positions. The novel stresses that the public legend of
Le Ber not only privileges but eroticizes her self­denial, her isolation, and her intense physical discomfort: "On bitter nights many a kind soul ... lay awake for a little,
listening to the roar of the storm, and wondered how it was with the recluse, under her single coverlid" (135).
That such piety is interpreted as authentic only when enacted by a woman is suggested by Cather's opposing representation of a male religious, Bishop Saint­Vallier.
Saint­Vallier is described as "a man of contradictions," and Euclid Auclair's patron, the Count, describes him as "an actor" (121). Like Le Ber, Saint­Vallier similarly
garbs himself in the severest dress, but his actions are

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 156

interpreted as "lacking in good taste," with a "piety too conspicuous. ... He had a hundred ways of making himself stand out from the throng, and his exceptional piety
was like a reproach to those of the clergy who were more conventional and perhaps more worldly" (123). In her article, "Female Grotesques: Carnival and Theory,"
Mary Russo sees a liberating potential in the performance of femininity. Russo argues that "deliberately assumed and foregrounded, femininity as a mask, for a man, is
a take­it­or­leave­it proposition; for a woman, a similar flaunting of the feminine is a take­it­and­leave­it possibility. To put on femininity with a vengeance suggests
the power of taking it off" (224). For Russo, femininity is an act of agency performed by a subject, rather than a constitutive aspect of a biologically­female individual.
Indeed, many critics have investigated Cather's masculine masquerades: in particular, Cather's high school cross­dressing and her focus on male subjectivity in such
novels as The Professor's House and Death Comes for the Archbishop have led critics to speculate on whether she assumes masculine masks, positioning herself
within male literary traditions in order to legitimate an exploration of lesbian themes, or even to continue writing within a culture with few successful female authors as
models.
The stability of the female identity Le Ber creates depends upon the stability of the home she creates. As Martin and Mohanty's theorizing suggests, Le Ber's home is
maintained by exclusion and suppression. Both the public legend Cécile reviews and Charron's subsequent stories about Le Ber are precipitated by intrusions that
undercut the possibility of maintaining a stable home. In Cécile's story, angels miraculously appear and fix her spinning wheel. In Charron's story, he describes his two
forced meetings with Le Ber. Both of these meetings undermine the possibility of constructing an inviolable space for women to call home; he keeps intruding, bringing
with him male expectations about what a woman's home should be and then telling stories that position him as a victim of Le Ber's refusal to meet those expectations:
"There are plenty of girls, ugly, poor, stupid, awkward, who are made for such a life. It was bad enough when she was shut up in her father's house; but now she is no
better than dead. Worse" (177–178). Although Charron identifies a religious coercion invisible to Cécile because it is withheld from her, his complaints are also
influenced by his disappointment that other institutions which would more directly benefit him—marriage and motherhood—did not claim Le Ber first. Despite
Charron's sense of masculine entitlement, his description of Le Ber refuses the text's earlier stories that imply that Le Ber's religious commitment is the natural fulfillment
of an essential feminine nature. Charron's stories suggest that "safe" religious homes are already constructed by a culture that desires women be located there.
Charron's stories reveal an increasing concern with female performance, with Le Ber's failure to perform a femininity that allows Charron to retain her

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 157

as a sexualized "Other." Charron portrays a Le Ber who moves progressively away from an accepted standard of femininity. His description of her before her self­
imposed seclusion focuses on her hostessing ability and her beauty. He recalls Le Ber "when she first came home from Quebec and used to be at her mother's side, at
the head of a long table full of good company, always looking out for everyone, saying the right thing to everyone" (178). Then, describing their first meeting four years
after her first retreat, Charron says, "She was gracious and gentle, as always, and at her ease. ... There was still colour in her cheeks,—not as rosy as she used to be,
but her face was fresh and soft, like the apple blossoms on that tree where we stood" (179). Le Ber's beauty is still reassuring in its familiarity, but it is immediately
undercut as Charron tells the story of their second meeting many years later, when he hides in the church, waiting for her to emerge from her cell for her solitary
midnight prayers:
She came in, carrying a candle. ... The candle shone up into her face. It was like a stone face; it had been through every sorrow. ... At first she prayed aloud, but I scarcely
understood her. My mind was confused; her voice was so changed,—hoarse, hollow, with the sound of despair in it. ... And once a groan, such as I have never heard; such
despair—such resignation and despair! (182–183)

Shorn of markers of femininity, Le Ber's face is no longer rosy and soft, and her formerly gracious voice has become "harsh and hollow like an old crow's—terrible to
hear!" (180). The change in Le Ber's voice confuses Charron and marks Le Ber as irredeemably changed, as radically "Other." While defiant, even joyful otherness
couched in mystical and miraculous descriptions marks Cécile's story and makes up the legend of Le Ber in public circulation, Charron's sharply contrasting story of
Le Ber enacts a verbal mourning, for him, of the female beauty he has lost. His speech forwards the despair he represents Le Ber as embodying, and it is Charron's
grief that masquerades as Le Ber's when he tells his story to Cécile's father.
As the epilogue to Shadows on the Rock reveals, Cécile eventually substitutes for Le Ber, marrying Charron and performing what was to be Le Ber's role as wife and
as mother of "four little boys, the Canadians of the future" (278). In Charron's story of Le Ber, the beautiful hostess is transformed into the incoherent prisoner, while in
the novel's story of Cécile, the child who takes to creating a home for her father with such enthusiasm is eventually transformed from daughter to wife, exchanged from
father to husband. By leaving unresolved the conflicts presented in the alternate stories of Le Ber, Cather cautions against claims of religious authority or transcendence
as methods of defining autonomous subject positions for women. Further, by suggesting in the epilogue that Cécile's growth to maturity culminates in her substitution

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 158

for Le Ber in marriage to Charron and in the fulfillment of her national duty to Canada by producing sons, Cather insists that spaces—whether domestic or religious—
have costs for women attached to their apparent safety.
Shadows on the Rock reveals that the subject positions available to women undergo continual reinterpretation, both public and private, and the struggle for meaning
lies not only with the story's teller, but also with its audience. The stories in the text not only refuse the illusion of coherence, they are in direct conflict with one another,
and the subject positions available for women are always polarized in the text: Cécile's story is one of adulation, and Charron's story is infused with loss and the desire
to possess Le Ber. Women become the object of desire and the currency of exchange; their serviceability enables his illusion of wholeness. Charron dismisses the
importance of Le Ber's lost dowry, but announces that "I care about defeat" (177). As Cécile realizes, even Mother Juschereau, who avoids the cultural "entombment"
of Le Ber, finds her stories of faith contradicting Cécile's father's stories of advancing science. When Mother Juschereau tells Cécile a story where a bit of bone from a
beloved priest was mixed with gruel and made an ill sailor into a Christian, "Cécile could only hope it would never happen that her father and Mother Juschereau
would enter into any discussion of miraculous cures. Her father must be right; but she felt in her heart that what Mother Juschereau told her had certainly occurred, and
the English sailor had been converted by Father Brébeuf's bone" (127). In each of these stories there is no final interpretation left for the reader to privilege as the text's
meaning.
An implicit argument throughout this chapter is that the text of Shadows on the Rock, which insists on fixity and the absence of change through the final page, wears its
insistence on stability like a mask. Stories and storytelling repeatedly undercut these qualities and reveal them as illusionary. Like several other critics who examine
Cather's use of storytelling, Sharon O'Brien reads Cather's storytelling as a narrative strategy to claim authority by forming literary connections with the storytellers of
her childhood:
Listening to women's talk as she crouched under the quilting frames, the young girl heard the unwritten history of the community that never entered written records or public
history. When Cather became a writer of fiction, she likewise practiced an art of connection: she retold and reworked some of these community stories, passing them on to her
readers, weaving together oral and written narratives, farm women and artists, past and future in her fiction. (29)

The art of connection O'Brien sees Cather practicing may result more from critical desires for feminist recovery of texts, and expectations regarding what women's
writing must do, than from the way storytelling functions in this text. In Shadows on the Rock, storytelling questions, challenges, and in some in­

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 159

stances—such as in the story of Jeanne Le Ber—even resists the expected "woman's work" of connection.
The practice of writing as the creation of safe space also has its parallel in Cather's biography. Cather knew the inevitable failure of an artist to control interpretation
and was concerned about future interpretations of herself, about the ways in which she would become a story. She limited as much as possible the range of
interpretations critics—who also tell stories—could make: Cather and her partner, Edith Lewis, retrieved and burned many of her letters to friends, and their efforts to
destroy a lifetime of personal communication were particularly effective in regard to the exchange of letters between Cather and Isabelle McClung Hamborg, a crucial
love relationship in Cather's life. In her will, Cather forbade publication of any surviving letters, and she refused to allow film or recorded versions of most of her
novels. Despite her efforts, James Woodress estimates that 1,500 of Cather's letters survive in various university collections. Ironically, her testamentary prohibition on
the direct quotation or publication of her letters insures that scholars must paraphrase her words—itself a form of interpretation. Moreover, besides simply making her
personal correspondence less accessible to readers and critics, Cather's actions have fueled abundant speculation about her sexuality.
In her literary biography, Willa Cather: The Emerging Voice, Sharon O'Brien argues persuasively that Cather was a lesbian and had sexual as well as emotional
attachments to the women whose lives she shared. Conversely, James Woodress argues in his biography of Cather, Willa Cather: A Literary Life, that, because
there is no external evidence, claims for Cather as a lesbian are unfounded. At this point in time, Cather's lesbianism has become something of an academic "open
secret," a scholarly closet with parallels to the concept of home desired and challenged in Shadows on the Rock. Although I find O'Brien's arguments regarding
Cather's lesbianism convincing, efforts to definitively position Cather as a lesbian are always vulnerable to challenge and may even run the risk of acquiescing to a
paradigm of sexuality that posits heterosexuality as normative and locates Cather outside of that paradigm. On the other hand, attempts to refute Cather's lesbianism
may rely on the same illusionary paradigm of a stable and normative heterosexuality. Further, heterosexist presumption and homophobia undergird claims that, because
no "proof" exists, Cather must have been, can only have been, heterosexual. As critics, we interpret Cather much as the characters in Shadows on the Rock interpret
Jeanne Le Ber: through the public legend about her or by entering the protected space of personal letters and testamentary prohibition in order to carry out
contradicting stories that reveal as much about her interpreters' desires as they do about Cather.
Shadows on the Rock concludes with an epilogue set fifteen years in the future. Carlin aptly describes the epilogue as "almost ... an extended musing on the idea and
the fact of change, what I believe is the central concern, both

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 160

formal and thematic, of this text" (86). Initially, the epilogue seems to cap the ambivalence of the foregoing pages with happy homecomings. Humbled and aged, Saint­
Vallier returns to Quebec after an absence of thirteen years, while Cécile has found a domestic home in marriage and motherhood. The novel concludes as Cécile's
father rejoices that "he was indeed fortunate to spend his old age here where nothing changed; to watch his grandsons grow up in a country where the death of the
King, the probable evils of a long regency, would never touch them" (279–280). But Saint­Vallier's return is notable precisely because he is changed, and Auclair's
final words cannot drown out the stories preceding them, stories which relentlessly refuse certainty and fixity even as they seek to establish stable homes. Nor can
readers dismiss Charron's substitution of Le Ber with Cécile, an apparently satisfactory and tractable Other, given Le Ber's extreme struggle to elude just such a home
as Cécile now occupies. Carlin argues that "in the brief dialectic about change with which the epilogue closes then, what we read is nothing less than a discussion by
the text about itself" (86). What's more, even the ambivalence of the epilogue might be read as Cather's commentary on the possibility of safe space. Shadows on the
Rock is an extraordinarily challenging novel, one that presents its readers with an examination of the desire for safe space that acknowledges the enormous power and
consolation of that desire, while at the same time investigating its costs, particularly for women. The tensions between the desire for a safe space to call home and the
fundamental questioning of the possibility that such a space can exist present us with an opportunity to unsettle our own homes and interrogate their creation.
Notes
1. "Feminist Politics: What's Home Got to Do With It?" Feminist Studies/Critical Studies, ed. Teresa de Lauretis (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1986),
208.
2. For well­edited selections of Cather's early writing, see Kingdom of Art, Willa Cather's First Principles and Critical Statements 1893–1896, ed. Bernice Slote
(Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1966) and The World and the Parish, Willa Cather's Articles and Reviews, Vols. 1 and 2, ed. William M. Curtin (Lincoln:
University of Nebraska Press, 1970).
3. In her article "Modernism: The Case of Willa Cather," Rose argues that "when Cather suppressed herself, she did it more completely than any writer I can think of."
See Modernism Reconsidered, ed. Robert Kiely (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1983), 139. Rose advocates Cather's pursuit of anonymity as one of the
aesthetic qualities aligning her with the Modernist movement and producing some of her "best" work. In "The Room Beyond, A Foreword on Willa Cather," Willa
Cather: On Writing (New York: Knopf, 1949), Steven Tennant also urges Cather's greatness be found in

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 161

universalizing aesthetic anonymity, with his belief that "A great writer should always have an anonymous quality, something remote like a pregnant silence—which
is silent, and yet contains all sound, all time, all things" (xv). Tennant's metaphor for anonymity, the "pregnant silence," renders anonymity a suspicious desire for female
authors. And silence, pregnant or otherwise, reiterates an unresolvable problem for women: when to write is also simultaneously to include everything in silence, the
authority to speak is a moot issue. Nancy K. Miller has argued more recently that anonymity, even if it were possible, might not be desirable for women authors, who
have a structurally different relationship to authority. In other words, it may very well matter, not only that the writer is a woman, but who that particular woman is. See
"Changing the Subject: Authorship, Writing, and the Reader," Feminist Studies/Critical Studies, ed. Teresa de Lauretis (Bloomington: Indiana University Press,
1986), 102–120. I agree that Cather sought anonymity, especially as it is yoked to universality, and perhaps for a woman writing during Cather's time and place, hers
was an effective strategy toward the goal of publishing and its rewards. But I also see her as constantly undercutting the possibility of anonymity through her use of
storytelling.
Works Cited
Carlin, Deborah. Cather, Canon, and the Politics of Reading. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 1992.
Cather, Willa. Death Comes for the Archbishop. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1927. Rpt. Vintage Books, Random House, 1971.
Cather, Willa. The Kingdom of Art: Willa Cather's First Principles and Critical Statements 1893–1896. Ed. Bernice Slote. Lincoln: University of Nebraska
Press, 1966.
Cather, Willa. Shadows on the Rock. New York: Knopf, 1931. Rpt. Vintage Books, Random House, 1971.
Cather, Willa. "On Shadows on the Rock." Willa Cather on Writing: Critical Studies on Writing as an Art. New York: Knopf, 1949.
Fryer, Judith. Felicitous Space. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1986.
Martin, Biddy, and Chandra Talpade Mohanty. "Feminist Politics: What's Home Got to Do With It?" Feminist Studies/Critical Studies. Ed. Teresa de Lauretis.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1986, 191–212.
Miller, Nancy K. "Changing the Subject: Authorship, Writing, and The Reader." Feminist Studies/Critical Studies. Ed. Teresa de Lauretis. Bloomington: Indiana
University Press, 1986.
O'Brien, Sharon. Willa Cather: The Emerging Voice. New York: Oxford University Press, 1987.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 162

Pratt, Minnie Bruce. ''Identity: Skin Blood Heart." Yours in Struggle: Three Feminist Perspectives on Anti­Semitism and Racism. Brooklyn, NY: Long Haul
Press, 1984.
Rose, Phyllis. "Modernism: The Case of Willa Cather." Modernism Reconsidered. Ed. Robert Kiely. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1983. 123–145.
Rosowski, Susan J. The Voyage Perilous: Willa Cather's Romanticism. Lincoln and London: University of Nebraska Press, 1986.
Russo, Mary. "Female Grotesques: Carnival and Theory." Feminist Studies, Critical Studies. Ed. Teresa de Lauretis. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1986.
213–229.
Tennant, Steven. "The Room Beyond, A Foreword on Willa Cather." Willa Cather: On Writing. By Willa Cather. New York: Knopf, 1949. v–xxiv.
Woodress, James. Willa Cather: A Literary Life. Lincoln and London: University of Nebraska Press, 1986.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 163

THRIVING
While mid to late twentieth­century women's writing certainly runs a wide gamut, it is tempting to identify it at least partially as writing which jumps into the breech,
speaking words heretofore denied women, breaking taboos about language and subject matter. The blues lyrics of a writer like Alberta Hunter demonstrate a sexual
frankness and playfulness previously rare in women's writing. In pleasing her audience with this play, she also earns artistic and economic sustenance. The fiction of
Anne Rice breaks every sexual and social taboo imaginable. Its immense popularity speaks for its timeliness, but also raises questions about how women are currently
using this new freedom of expression.
The goals of contemporary writers seem at once more personal and more public than those of nineteenth­ and early twentieth­century writers examined in this
anthology. Joy Kogawa and Sandra Cisneros, for instance, speculate within their fiction on individual and communal enhancement. They are politically motivated in
their concern about violence against women, people of color, and children, but they are also concerned on a personal level with finding, through narrative, means of
thriving in the aftermath of that violence. Both express, in their own ways, a concern for personal integrity, particularly for women of color who face prejudice daily
from both mainstream and ethnic communities. While these two authors are not speaking for larger groups of women, they are in many ways representative of the
contemporary renaissance of writing by culturally diverse women in the United States and of women's commitment to healing themselves and their communities.
Another way of considering this newfound expression might be in looking at the languages of the body that emerge within the writing considered in this section.
Hunter's playful doubling of language engages both mind and body; Rice's graphic depictions of sex and violence replay, and in some ways control, the moment of
trauma; Cisneros explores a girl's developing consciousness of her body as female through multiple linguistic lenses; and Kogawa creates passages of lyrical prose to
bridge the mind and body. While certainly some writers appear to replay the moment of rupture, other contemporary women writers seem compelled to find a
language that will validate the self—as a mind/body whole—and reintegrate that self into a world made safe for it.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 165

"The Chicana Girl Writes Her Way In and Out: Space and Bilingualism in Sandra Cisneros' The House on Mango Street"
Tomoko Kuribayashi
Sandra Cisneros' young Chicana character/narrator in The House on Mango Street is oppressed in United States society in at least three senses: she is nonwhite,
poor, and female. But the character Esperanza draws her strength from the very sources of her oppression. Her ability to speak two languages with equal fluency and
her compassion for the socially weak and neglected, especially women of her community and of other ethnic origins, give her a unique spatial vision which enlivens her
imagination as a writer and as a social critic. Having mastered two languages, Esperanza knows the two different worlds that the two languages construct and
represent. She is able to travel back and forth between the two languages and the two worlds, creating, in the process, new space for herself and for the people she
wishes to help out—women, the poor, and minorities, with whom she has something in common. This chapter highlights how bilingualism helps the narrator create a
safe space for herself and other Mexican­American women in a society full of violence towards women and minorities. 1
As a young Chicana growing up in a Mexican­American community in Chicago, Cisneros' narrator­protagonist, Esperanza, is keenly aware of the economic and
cultural oppression of the people of her ethnic background in American society, including the oppression of Chicana women within the minority community. Esperanza
shares Gloria Anzaldúa's sense of the danger that women of color face from day to day in the United States as well as in other places:
Woman does not feel safe when her won culture, and white culture, are critical of her; when the males of all races hunt her as prey.
Alienated from her mother culture, "alien" in the dominant culture, the woman of color does not feel safe within the inner life of her Self. Petrified,

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 166
she can't respond, her face caught between los intersticios, the spaces between the different worlds she inhabits. (Anzaldúa 20)

2

Cisneros' narrative illuminates the linguistic, spatial and sexual oppression that racist society imposes on minority—more specifically Chicana—women, but also offers
a somewhat hopeful perspective on future possibilities. Architecture is a central means by which society as well as Cisneros express and experience oppression as well
as hope for change. In the beginning of Cisneros' novel, Esperanza yearns for acquisition of cultural ideals of the white society, most specifically the white, middle­class
house widely displayed in mass media. Esperanza's architectural craving recreates the author Cisneros' childhood experiences in a Mexican­American ghetto in
Chicago. Cisneros recollects her family house, "crowded as the nine of us were in cramped apartments where there were children sleeping on the living room couch
and fold­out Lazy Boy, and on beds set up in the middle room, where the only place with any privacy was the bathroom" ("Notebook" 69). She also remembers
wondering "why our home wasn't all green lawn and white wood like the ones in 'Leave It To Beaver' or 'Father Knows Best'" (72).
These television programs played a significant role in aggravating the Chicana girl's sense of her family's architectural deficiency. Cisneros' narrator, Esperanza, also
wants a house just like the ones she sees on television and all her family members share her dream:
[My parents] always told us that one day we would move into a house, a real house that would be ours for always so we wouldn't have to move each year. And our house would
have running water and pipes that worked. And inside it would have real stairs, not hallway stairs, but stairs inside like the houses on T.V. And we'd have a basement and at least
three washrooms so when we took a bath we wouldn't have to tell everybody. Our house would be white with trees around it, a great big yard and grass growing without a fence.
This was the house Papa talked about when he held a lottery ticket and this was the house Mama dreamed up in the stories she told us before we went to bed. (4)

Despite the parents' hopeful tone, it is unlikely that they will ever have such a house, as the narrative soon makes clear. When socioeconomic conditions render it so
difficult—almost impossible—for Chicano/as to acquire such houses, mainstream culture's architecutral ideal, which purportedly inspires cultural and economic
aspirations in every viewer, only helps oppress the minority populations further.
Young Esperanza is keenly aware of how houses define and represent the resident's social status; so simply having a roof over one's head is not enough.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 167

Esperanza remembers how ashamed she felt when she pointed to a third­floor flat where she lived, to a nun from her school. The nun asked, "You live there? The
way she said it made me feel like nothing. There. I lived there. I nodded" (5). She then resolved that she would have to have "a real house. One I could point to" (5),
to be accepted into mainstream society. When her family moves to Mango Street, she still knows that the house is not respectable enough and yearns to escape to a
better place.
But later her vision changes and she contemplates the possibility of housing the poor in her future house:
People who live on hills sleep so close to the stars they forget those of us who live too much on earth. They don't look down at all except to be content to live on hills. They have
nothing to do with last week's garbage or fear of rats. Night comes. Nothing wakes them but the wind.
One day I'll own my own house, but I won't forget who I am or where I came from. Passing bums will ask, Can I come in? I'll offer them the attic, ask them to stay, because I know
how it is to be without a house. (87)

Owning and controlling her own space is to own her self. One cannot become oneself without having one's own place. As Cherríe Moraga asserts, the "anti­materialist
approach [that some white, middle­class feminists take] makes little sense in the lives of poor and Third World Women" (129), when material conditions are so much
a part of their oppression that coming into possession of material necessities is a must for becoming one's own person. But Esperanza does more than owning herself in
the quoted passage. In other words, she does not unquestioningly embrace white, materialist beliefs in earthly possessions and financial security as a priority in and by
themselves. First, Esperanza challenges mainstream society's definition of the family. Secondly, and more importantly, taking the socially rejected and oppressed—
regardless of their gender, ethnicity, and other differences—into her own space is an expression of Esperanza's defiance of the dominant culture which bases itself on a
rigid socio­economic hierarchy and on dichotomous thinking. Her act turns the condition of exclusion of social outcasts into that of inclusion. Moreover, her gesture
connects her future to her origin, her future self to Mango Street: "I won't forget who I am or where I came from" (21). Merging the public and the private, or the
inside and the outside, is moving toward liberating women of her ethnic background as well as liberating any women who are confined indoors while men move much
more freely outside houses. Once the distinction between the inside and the outside collapses, there is no more confining anybody indoors. Merging the two seemingly
separate spaces, then, means doing away with rigid gender differentiations as well.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 168

In The House on Mango Street, as sociocultural oppressions and future hopes are architecturally expressed, so are the female characters' experiences of social and
sexual violence inseparably linked to their spatial experiences. The text, for example, offers a definition of what public space—space outside houses—means to the
women characters, which in turn determines the meaning of the indoor space and of the female body. The best illustration of this is how, to Cisneros' young narrator,
space outside houses stands for young women's freedom as well as ostracism from the Chicano/a community. Esperanza envies women a little older than herself who
dare roam the night streets in search of romantic adventure. But she also knows how little chance for social acceptance these women will have both in the Chicano
community and in mainstream American society.
Esperanza sees possibilities in the female bodies that float, or almost float, around in the streets. Marin, an older girl Esperanza admires, is one of them. When her
baby­sitter's duties are done in the evening, Marin comes out of her aunt's house. Though "she can only stay out in front, .... What matters, Marin says, is for the boys
to see us and for us to see them" (27). When boys passing by tease her, "Marin just looks at them without even blinking and is not afraid" (27). Later, speculating on
the relationship between a neighborhood boy she fancies and his girlfriend, Esperanza wishes she could be as bold as the girl, Lois. "Everything is holding its breath
inside me. ... I want to sit out bad at night, a boy around my neck and the wind under my skirt" (73). This desire on the young narrator's part and her daring to make
an explicit statement about it are what can possibly enable her to form her own, less inhibiting view of the female body.
Esperanza, however, knows too well what would be the community's judgment on such behavior by young girls. Marin will soon be sent back to Mexico because her
aunt thinks she is too much trouble, and Esperanza's mother criticizes Lois, "those kinds of girls, those girls are the ones that go into alleys" (73). Much as she hungers
for street life and is aware of her body's potentials, Esperanza also fears "outdoors" and her own female body because of the social sanctions waiting for women who
venture out too far. In the vignette "Red Clowns," Esperanza experiences this danger firsthand when she is sexually assaulted by strangers at a carnival.
In The House on Mango Street the female body becomes another kind of the space outside, a prohibited space that women fear and yearn to reconnect to. Yet,
ironically, society demands that the female body not go out into the literal "space outside." If it did, the "inside" would become the "outside," and the social order would
collapse. True, some female bodies are allowed outside domestic space—or excluded from it—to satisfy certain kinds of male sexual desires, but these women are
''public women," deemed unfit for the home and subject to violation and exploitation without limits. Except for these women,

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 169

the female body must be kept indoors so that the status quo of the public/private division is maintained with men in public space and women in private space. Chicana
women in Cisneros' text are allowed no space of their own, with the streets off limits and their bodies made inaccessible. Domestic space is not safe either, as
exemplified by the abuse Esperanza's Chicana neighbors endure at the hand of their fathers and husbands.
Esperanza, however, also has another vision of space outside, that is, a space that her imagination and her writing—and bilingual ability—will create for her outside
and beyond the limits of her Mexican­American community and of the dominant white culture of America. This last kind of "outdoors"—based on her bicultural and
bilingual experiences and abilities—has the potential of redefining the "indoor" space as well as the female body for Cisneros' adolescent narrator. Cisneros' text
demonstrates how being bilingual makes Esperanza aware that there is more than one way to interpret what is spoken and written; bilingualism brings her the
realization that she can choose what suits her purpose best.
Esperanza's name, which comes from her grandmother, who resented but could not undo the confinement brought on her by her marriage, means "hope." "In English
my name means hope. In Spanish it means too many letters. It means sadness, it means waiting" (10). Cisneros' narrative suggests that Esperanza's hope for the future
lies in making the most liberating linguistic choices, beginning with her own name. Taking control of language will enable Esperanza to avoid being trapped inside
houses and inside Mango Street, where her culture confines women and the white culture confines her people, and to go out to find her own house, her own space.
Where she goes to, which space she will fit in, is yet unknown. She will not go into white society as it is. She will instead have to find, or rather create, her own space.
Reminiscing about her grandmother, who "looked out the window her whole life, the way so many women sit their sadness on an elbow," Esperanza says, "I have
inherited her name, I don't want to inherit her place by the window" (11). The window, which could be an in­between space, established on the very borderline of
private and public, and therefore can be subversive, remains a space of oppression and fruitless yearning in Cisneros' text. For example, a beautiful neighbor woman,
Rafaela, is only allowed to talk to the children from her window, because of her husband's irrational jealousy. Not only does Esperanza decide to escape the
limitations of the window space, she also considers renaming herself: "I would like to baptize myself under a new name, a name more like the real me, the one nobody
sees'' (11).
Cisneros' narrative highlights how language—and taking control of it—is a determining factor for Esperanza's future. Taking control of language means taking control
of one's spatial experiences. The narrative of The House on Mango Street is a linguistic manifestation and product of the process in

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 170

which Esperanza creates a new self and a new world. The text also testifies how she can do this through giving herself a new name and discovering a new language,
without disowning the cultural background from which she comes.
The text emphasizes how the narrator's further dream is to come back to where she is from, after successfully venturing out and securing her own space outside
Mango Street: "I have gone away to come back. For the ones I left behind. For the ones who cannot out" (110). This movement envisioned by Esperanza suggests
spiraling, as opposed to the linearity often espoused by Anglo­Saxon cultures, and thus constitutes another challenge to the white society and its culture. The text
indicates that Esperanza "will always be Mango Street" (104), as the three sisters have prophesied. Although the narrator is ashamed of the house on Mango Street,
that she is also fond of it is shown in the way she anthropomorphizes the building: "It's small and red with tight steps in front and windows so small you'd think they
were holding their breath'' (4). Her vision is of becoming a somewhat free (that is, freer than the women she sees suffering around her) agent, perhaps transcultural or
culturally mobile, who can translate herself and what happens to and around her from one language into another, from one place to another. She hopes to be able to
write her way both out and in. In and out of the Mexican­American world where people speak Spanish. In and out, also, of the mainstream American world where
English is the linguistic medium.
Author Cisneros herself sees two voices in two languages speaking in her writing:
These two voices at odds with each other—my mother's punch­you­in­the­nose English and my father's powdered­sugar Spanish—curiously are the voices that surface in my
writing. What I'm specially aware of lately is how the Spanish syntax and word choice occurs in my work even though I write in English. ("Notebook" 72)

Like Esperanza, Cisneros sees herself as "a translator. I am an amphibian. I can travel in both worlds. What I'm saying is very important for the Latino community, but
it is also important for the white community to hear" ("Solo Traveler" B2). 3
Having two languages at one's command may enable a person to avoid being locked into one specific value system, or in one specific identity. As Chris Weedon in
Feminist Practice and Poststructuralist Theory has asserted, our "conditions of existence ... are at one and the same time both material and discursive" (8). If
language—the "discursive"—as well as architecture—the "material"—defines/confines people's bodies and thoughts, Esperanza, as a bilingual and bicultural person
(and female in addition), may be able to "swim" between the two languages/two spaces, and to create her own stories and spaces.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 171

Patricia Yaeger in Honey­Mad Women suggests that being bilingual can emancipate women (and women characters). One of the ways "the writer can bring a
subversive multivoicedness into her text," she says, discussing Charlotte Brontë's novels, is "that the second language can operate as a form of interruption, as a way of
dispelling the power of the myth systems represented by the text's primary language" (37). In Esperanza's case, both Spanish and English are patriarchal languages and
are not in themselves subversive. However, the two languages multiply her options. For example, English gives her a way out in the instance of her first name. Thus,
Esperanza is able to deconstruct the Anglophone world from a Spanish­speaking person's viewpoint as well as question the Mexican­American community's values
from an English­speaker's point of view. Moreover, she can deconstruct and question the patriarchal value system(s), whether Anglophone or Mexican­American,
from a woman's point of view.
Belonging to a culture means knowing what outsiders don't, or at least understanding the same phenomena differently—more accurately. The vignette "Those Who
Don't," for example, illustrates how cultural and linguistic outsiders and insiders view Esperanza's neighbors differently. Outsiders come into the neighborhood scared,
while Esperanza and her friends feel comfortable because they know who is who. When Louie's cousin brings a Cadillac and drives the community kids around before
he gets arrested for a car theft, the children do not share the police's definition of him as a criminal. Rather, he is the cousin of their friend: "They put handcuffs on him
and put him in the back seat of the cop car, and we all waved as they drove away" (25).
Member of two different worlds, Esperanza may be able to establish her own hybrid values to support her visions for new life, for a new world. Gloria Anzaldúa calls
this creation "the lifeblood of two worlds merging to form a third country—a border culture" by "those who cross over, pass over, or go through the confines of the
'normal'" (3). It is also "a synthesis of duality, and a third perspective—something more than mere duality or a synthesis of duality'' (46). In her 1994 article "Purity,
Impurity, and Separation," María Lugones also closely examines the position of a "mestiza" and warns against the mainstream society's attempt to attain "Control over
creativity" (460) by breaking a "hybrid" person into separate components. Lugones stresses the need to protect "hybrid ways of creation" (471). To do so,
"mexican/americans" should not withdraw into their communities, Lugones continues, nor should they assimilate into "the anglo domain" (471). Mexican­Americans'
becoming their own "requires that the language and conceptual framework of the public become hybrid" (471). Esperanza's sally into the Anglophone world, as well as
Cisneros' writing this book, is a manifestation of the hybrid modes of creation and the hybridization of the public world that Lugones speaks of.
Virginia Woolf once wondered which was worse, to be confined or to be excluded: "I thought how unpleasant it is to be locked out; and I thought how

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 172

it is worse perhaps to be locked in" (24). In a way, Woolf herself was culturally bilingual, in that she was at once an educated, upper­middle class person—and
female. Despite her dichotomous view of being both on the inside and on the outside of privilege, Woolf was already starting to break down the barrier between the
two, or to realize that the barrier/distinction is arbitrary and can be defied. Because of her cultural placement, Cisneros' character, Esperanza, may have an even more
flexible vision than Woolf's of what may be possible, when it comes to discerning borderlines and crossing (or stretching) them. Esperanza explores and then rejects
the dichotomy of inside/outside, and posits new alternatives. She will attempt to find, create, and/or establish her own identity and her own space, which will be in both
white and Mexican­American cultures and societies, but which will also be in neither. And she can do so well only if she knows who she is and if she believes in what
she is and does.
Esperanza's sense of self and freedom and its affirmation come from her writing. Her disabled aunt, Lupe, listening to Esperanza's poems, encourages her to keep on
writing, her advice again embodying the strength Esperanza's culture and older women around her can give her:
That's nice. That's very good, she said in her tired voice. You just remember to keep writing, Esperanza. You must keep writing. It will keep you free, and I said yes, but at that time
I didn't know what she meant. (61)

Just as Woolf wrote to create space for women to write in, Esperanza creates space through writing. Just in the same way, I think, the novel, The House on Mango
Street, has created a unique kind of space for its author in the American literary scene, by transforming, or hybridizing, the literary world.
But Woolf asked for a room and good­sized income before she could write. She was keenly aware of the constraints economic and spatial deprivation could impose
on a woman writer's imagination. This awareness is not absent from Cisneros' text nor from Chicana critics' writings. Rather, literary freedom is inseparably linked to
material liberation in both instances. Yvonne Yarbro­Bejarano discusses how "The exclusion of Chicanas from literary authority is intimately linked to the exclusion of
Chicanas from other kinds of power monopolized by privileged white males. Their struggle to appropriate the 'I' of literary discourse relates to their struggle for
empowerment in the economic, social and political spheres" (139). Esperanza's narrative and Cisneros' writing, then, pave the way for Chicanas to come into their
own economically, socially and politically in United States society. As Yarbro­Bejarano writes, "In telling these stories [about themselves and other Chicanas],
Chicanas reject the dominant culture's definition of what a Chicana is. In writing, they refuse the

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 173

objectification imposed by gender roles and racial and economic exploitation" (141). Establishing their identity free of oppressions by racist patriarchal society through
writing becomes the foundation for Chicanas' gaining control over all aspects of their lives. María Lugones also stresses the importance of taking control of "the
production of material life" in a manner of hybrid creativity ("Purity" 471).
In light of the creation of such a self­image, it is significant that the narrator of Cisneros' book speaks from a young female child's point of view. Of course, such a point
of view, presented as malleable and naive, is artificially constructed. Cisneros' adoption of a youthful perspective may, however, suggest the sort of subjectivity a
woman needs if she is to embark on deconstructing the world around her—a more open, vulnerable, imaginative subjectivity that some cultures attribute to children.
Needless to say, such an endeavor can be undertaken only at a tremendous cost to the agent, and it may very well be questioned whether such a thin­skinned
subjectivity can survive this ordeal.
Perhaps more importantly, taking on a child's or an adolescent's point of view is a literary strategy that facilitates Cisneros' narrator's questioning of what is around her
and what has been imposed on her or taken away from her. It also enables her to deconstruct and reconstruct her society, her language, and her body which society
and language forcibly define. In other words, Cisneros may have chosen a girl's point of view so that the deconstructing process is literarily facilitated. As Chris
Weedon says, "Conscious subjectivity, acquired in language, is seen as inherently unstable and subjectivity itself as constantly in process" (87–88). Cisneros' young
narrator, through telling stories and writing, through discovering and/or creating her own language between two established linguistic systems (English and Spanish), will
be able to feel and see the flexibility of her subjectivity, which will let her more easily remold herself and her world view.
Cisneros' novella also follows the coming­of­age formula. Even though people are constantly in process, some cultures, including that of the United States, affirm the
state of being in process only for a specific growing­up time. As adults, people are supposed to be finished. In such a culture, puberty/adolescence becomes a kind of
borderline, a third kind of space. Conveniently, in the case of Cisneros' text this view of the narrator's age as an in­between­but­in­neither sort of space matches her
positioning as a bilingual and bicultural being.
The last vignette of Cisneros' novella, "Mango Says Goodbye Sometimes," addresses the crucial question of whether Esperanza will be able to come back to where
she is from, once she gets out of Mango Street, or of her Mexican­American community. The viewpoint is of a grown­up writer's, not a young girl's:

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 174
I make a story for my life, for each step my brown shoe takes. I say, "And so she trudged up the wooden stairs, her sad brown shoes taking her to the house she never liked."
I like to tell stories. I am going to tell you a story about a girl who didn't want to belong.
We didn't always live on Mango Street ...
I put it down on paper and then the ghost does not ache so much. I write it down and Mango says goodbye sometimes. She does not hold me with both arms. She sets me free.
(109–10).

The rest of the vignette suggests that she will not totally desert Mango Street. She will definitely come back, just as Cisneros has by writing this novella. Through the
very text of The House on Mango Street the narrator moves back to her native community. The narrative is a textual documentation of the homeward movement of
her body as well as of her spiritual homecoming.
The narrator's leaving home is necessary, though, for her to find her self. Anzaldúa says of herself, "I had to leave home so I could find myself, find my own intrinsic
nature buried under the personality that had been imposed on me" (16). Esperanza is taking tremendous risks, and she is fortunate to be able to choose to do so, since
so few of her group of people can afford it. As Anzaldúa says, "As a working class people our chief activity is to put food in our mouths, a roof over our heads and
clothes on our backs" (17). While most women of her ethnicity have had to choose between "three directions ... to the Church as a nun, to the streets as a prostitute,
or to the home as mother," Esperanza is making the newly and sparingly available fourth choice, "entering the world by way of education and career and becoming
self­autonomous persons," or claiming a public identity (Anzaldúa 17). She can do so because she has visions, and also because she has language skills and the energy
which she inherits from the Chicana women around her.
Acquiring education and a career, a minority in a white, racist society risks making compromises and being assimilated into the white world. But retaining one's own
perspective is still possible. In her article, "Playfulness, 'World'­Travelling, and Loving Perception," María Lugones discusses what it means to travel to different
worlds:
Those of us who are "world"­travellers have the distinct experience of being different in different "worlds" and of having the capacity to remember other "worlds" and ourselves
in them...the experience is of being a different person in different "worlds" and yet of having memory of oneself as different without quite having the sense of there being any
underlying "I.'' (11)

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 175

According to Lugones, one of the ways of being at ease in a world is "being a fluent speaker in that 'world.' I know all the norms that there are to be followed, I know
all the words that there are to be spoken" (12). At least linguistically, then, Esperanza can be at ease both in the Anglophone and Mexican­American worlds. Lugones
recommends that we (women) travel to other people's (women's) worlds so that we can look at things, including ourselves, from a different point of view. Cisneros'
character, Esperanza, travels from one world to another and creates a third space of her own. She is not trapped in any one of them. Even the new space she creates
for herself will welcome other travellers, just as her dream house will shelter passing bums. Similarly Cisneros' narrative invites her readers into a new fictional space.
It is important to note that such a straddle as Esperanza assumes can just as easily stifle her voice because the narrator/writer may feel out of place in both systems,
instead of being at home in both. Gloria Anzaldúa finds the in­between space both liberating and murderous to Chicana women, as testified by the two conflicting
points of view quoted from her in this chapter. The balance Esperanza must maintain to preserve the liberating element is extremely delicate. What helps her keep the
just right posture is, as has been pointed out above, her strong connection to the Chicana/o community of her childhood. Yarboro­Bejarano points out the connection
between Cisneros' and Esperanza's writing and their connections to the Mexican­American community:
The House on Mango Street captures the dialectic between self and community in Chicana writing. Esperanza finds her literary voice through her own cultural experience and that
of other Chicanas. She seeks self­empowerment through writing, while recognizing her commitment to a community of Chicanas. Writing has been essential in connecting her with
the power of women and her promise to pass down that power to other women is fulfilled by writing and publication of the text itself. (141)

Cisneros' emphasis on her narrator's ties to the Chicana/o community is another challenge that her narrative issues against the mainstream American individualism.
Nina Auerbach, discussing women outcasts in Victorian England in Romantic Imprisonment, says that "culture takes inspiration from its outcasts" (xvii). Anzaldúa
argues that outcasts tend to have highly developed sensitivity, what she calls "La facultad," "the capacity to see in surface phenomena the meaning of deeper realities,
to see the deep structure below the surface" (38). By being an outcast from the dominant society and temporarily "becoming" an outcast also from her own ethnic
group—exiling herself from the Chicano/a community—Esperanza may become the source from which societies/cultures derive

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 176

their energy and their future. By definition, for an outcast, boundaries are not permeable. However, as outcasts force society and culture to change and grow, the
borderlines shift and expand, creating in the process third spaces in which the oppressed can live and speak out in relative safety.
In The House on Mango Street, at least three elements combine to generate a strategy for creating new, safer spaces which will accommodate women's desires,
including the desire to write: Cisneros' central character's bilingualism, her cultural placement as a minority person within the dominant white culture of the United
States and as a young woman within the segregated Mexican­American community, and her ability as a writer. Cisneros' text suggests that women's writing taking
place in these new spaces will lead to creation of more new spaces where women—more specifically, Chicana women—can develop their abilities and cherish their
dreams.
Notes
1. One important way in which Cisneros' text reaches the audience most in need of the encouragement it offers is the public readings the author often gives. For
example, see the January 7, 1993 New York Times article, "A Solo Traveler in Two Worlds," which reports on her reading at a tiny branch of The Brooklyn Public
Library.
2. Anzaldúa's language can connote essentialism, as in the case of the first word "Woman" in this indented quote.
3. Cisneros uses more Spanish in her poetry, especially in her most recent poetry collection, The Loose Woman, than in her fiction.
Works Cited
Anzaldúa, Gloria. Borderlands/La Frontera: The New Mestiza. San Francisco: Spinsters/Aunt Lute Book Company, 1987.
Auerbach, Nina. Romantic Imprisonment: Women and Other Glorified Outcasts. New York: Columbia University Press, 1986.
Cisneros, Sandra. The House on Mango Street. 1986; New York: Vintage Books, 1991.
Cisneros, Sandra. "From A Writer's Notebook—Ghosts and Voices: Writing from Obsession." Americas Review 15.1 (Spring 1987): 69–73.
Cisneros, Sandra. "A Solo Traveler in Two Worlds." Interview with Mary B.W. Tabor. The New York Times. January 7, 1993. B2.
Lugones, María. "Playfulness, 'World'­Travelling, and Loving Perception." Hypatia 2.2 (Summer 1987): 3–19.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 177

Lugones, María. "Purity, Impurity, and Separation." Signs 19.2 (Winter 1994): 458–479.
Moraga, Cherríe. Loving in the War Years. Boston: South End Press, 1983.
Weedon, Chris. Feminist Practice and Poststructuralist Theory. Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1987.
Woolf, Virginia. A Room of One's Own. 1929; London: Grafton Books, 1977.
Yaeger, Patricia. Honey­Mad Women: Emancipatory Strategies in Women's Writing. New York: Columbia University Press, 1988.
Yarbro­Bejarano, Yvonne. "Chicana Literature from a Chicana Feminist Perspective." Chicana Creativity and Criticism: Charting New Frontiers in American
Literature. Eds. María Herrera­Sobek and Helena María Viramontes. Houston: Arte Público Press, 1988. 139–169.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 179

Abuse and Its Pleasures: Compensatory Fantasy in the Popular Fiction of Anne Rice
Annalee Newitz
I don't want to think of witches as some sort of rare commodity to those who know how to use them.
—spoken by Ash, a character in Rice's Taltos

The story behind the movie Interview with the Vampire, based on Anne Rice's first novel, dramatizes an issue which has plagued Rice as an author for a long time:
she is a marginal cult figure confronting what it means to have a mainstream audience. Rice, whose screenplay for Interview had been kicking around Hollywood since
the late 1970s, had very specific ideas about how the movie should be made. She felt it ought to be something like a low­budget European art film, starring Rutger
Hauer or Jeremy Irons. Hollywood had other ideas and hired all­American movie star Tom Cruise to play the aristocratic Lestat. At first, Rice was appalled, telling
anyone in the press who would listen that mainstream Hollywood stars like Cruise would ruin her work. She appealed to her fans to boycott the movie, and would not
relent until she finally saw an early cut that changed her mind. Taking out a full­page ad in Variety, Rice proclaimed that Cruise had done a wonderful job and
retracted her earlier comments. Later, she told TV Guide in an interview that she would never again scorn her status as a popular author with a mass audience.
Rice, like her cultish vampire heroes, finally gave up lurking in the shadows and cashed in on monstrosity—or, to put it simply, she got used to the idea of selling out.
While Rice wanted to claim initially that she was "victimized" by Hollywood, clearly she was hardly the victim in this situation—not only did she make a small fortune
off the movie deal, but she was also able to use her story of "abuse" to nearly crush the movie project with bad publicity. Although Hollywood and the demands of its
mass audience had supposedly "traumatized" Rice, she finally decided to "join" Hollywood, helping to make the movie version of Interview a smash hit of the
Christmas season in 1995.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 180

In an ironic mirroring of Rice's own "selling out," the heroes in Rice's novels have in common one basic trait: they feel marginalized or abused, but learn to use their
victimhood as a form of empowerment. Her characters often become powerful, wealthy, or famous by taking up the tools of their oppressors—and revaluing their
victimization as something pleasurable and special. Rice's best sellers, for which she is most widely known, include novels about vampires, witches, mummies, and
demons (the five Vampire Chronicles, three novels in the Witch Cycle, The Mummy and Servant of the Bones). In recent years, as she has grown progressively
more famous, Rice has revealed that she also writes sadomasochistic pornography and "bodice ripper" romances under the names A. N. Roquelaure and Anne
Rampling (the Sleeping Beauty trilogy, Belinda and Exit to Eden); she has also written two historical novels.
I want to suggest that Rice's novels—like her brief anti­Hollywood publicity campaign—can function to simultaneously arouse and dismiss her audience's feelings
about various kinds of social abuse. By representing abuse within a contained, fictionalized setting, one might say that Rice generates a therapeutic "safe space" in
which readers can experience and master their anxieties about abuse. And to a certain extent, I want to allow for this possibility in my analysis. But there is also
something deeply troubling about the way Rice invites readers to deal with their anxieties. For ultimately she offers what I will call an "anti­therapeutic" resolution to
abusive situations: her abused characters gain power by sustaining and even celebrating their trauma. Usually this means that they become abusers themselves, learn to
enjoy abuse, or wreak violent revenge upon their abusers. Rice reproduces—often symbolically—the terror and anguish of the abusive situation, but the only way out
is "getting on top" rather than escape from abusive relationships altogether. In other words, she dismisses or limits the possibilities of "safe space" readers might seek in
her fiction by suggesting that nowhere is ''safe" from abuse. Rather than safety, she offers her readers compensatory sadomasochistic fantasies and the promise of
unlimited, vengeful power.
Recently, feminists have begun to ask what it might mean for women to have pleasurable fantasies about rape, or violence, or hurting children—fantasies which are, by
and large, associated with a stereotypically "male" imagination in popular culture. In her landmark work Loving with a Vengeance, Tania Modleski looked at female­
authored "taken by force" scenarios in romance novels and concluded that "we have seen that the desire to be taken by force (manifest content) conceals anxieties
about rape and longings for power and revenge (latent content)" (Modleski 48). What I want to focus on in this chapter is what Modleski calls the "latent content" of
these kinds of fantasies. In Rice's fiction, which often blurs the boundaries between gothic horror, romance, and sadomasochistic pornography, we find anxiety about
transgressive sexual acts coupled with a desire to perform them for the sake of "power and revenge." Fredric Jameson, whose work on popular culture heavily informs

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 181

Modleski's analysis of the romance, suggests that popular narratives struggle to generate allegories adequate to explain social reality (Jameson 281–299). That is,
popular narratives can be understood as allegorical representations of certain social truths, such as the ubiquity of domestic violence, or the terrifying results of class
warfare. I would suggest that there are two such social allegories working together—or perhaps against each other—in Rice's fiction. One, which I will discuss first,
understands Rice's fantastical monsters as figures for sexually abused children and their families. The other allegory, which gets told in her erotic fiction, understands
gendered sexual relations to stand in for specifically economic power relations. That is, I will be offering two allegorical pathways through Rice's work; if we follow
one after the other, we will reach a point where we can see that understanding what is at stake in Rice's fiction means finding a way of reading traumatic sexual
violation together with what might be called traumatic economic violation. Rice's writing functions as an allegory for and symptom of many people's experiences with
abuse: as children, as gendered beings, and as adults who are trying to negotiate their class identities in a capitalist economy.
The Abused Child as Monster
Rice's Vampire Chronicles are comprised of five novels about the relationships between several vampires who form a series of "families." Most notably in the first two
novels, Interview with the Vampire and The Vampire Lestat, we find eroticized, romantic relationships between parents and children. The point­of­view character
in Interview is Louis, a vampire who recounts his experiences during the nineteenth century to a boy who interviews him in contemporary San Francisco. Louis is
made a vampire by Lestat, the point­of­view character in the following four novels. Conversion into a vampire—in which Louis and Lestat exchange blood—is both
erotic and reminiscent of breast feeding, according to Louis:
Lestat whispered to me, his lips moving against my neck. I remember that the movement of his lips raised the hair all over my body, sent a shock of sensation through my body
that was not unlike the pleasure of passion. ... He pressed his bleeding wrist to my mouth. ... I drank, sucking the blood out of the holes, experiencing for the first time since
infancy the special pleasure of sucking nourishment. ... I heard the night as if it were a chorus of whispering women, all beckoning me to their breasts. (Interview 18–21)

In this scene, part of Louis' pleasure is predicated on his "infantile" response to Lestat, who later takes on the role of Louis' neglectful parent and lover. To keep Louis
from fleeing what becomes an increasingly antagonistic relationship, Lestat

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 182

makes a "vampire child" out of a five­year­old girl named Claudia. To produce her, Lestat tempts Louis to drink her blood. Rather than let her die, Lestat feeds her his
own blood and makes her a vampire who will remain in a little girl's body forever. Later, he threatens Louis by pretending he might kill or harm Claudia if Louis
disobeys him. Louis and Claudia become inseparable, and Louis considers their relationship to be a union between "Father and Daughter. Lover and
Lover" (Interview 102). Rice offers many descriptions of Claudia's childish sensuality, heightening our sense that it is precisely her status as a child that makes her so
sexually alluring to her "parent" Louis. In The Vampire Lestat, we discover that Lestat himself has engaged in an eroticized relationship with his biological mother
Gabrielle during and after transforming her into a vampire. Lestat describes:
I leant forward and kissed the blood on [Gabrielle's] open lips ... [then] came the thirst, not obliterating but heating every concept of her, until she was flesh and blood and mother
and lover and all things beneath the cruel pressure of my fingers and my lips, everything I had ever desired. I drove my teeth into her, feeling her stiffen and gasp, and I felt my
mouth grow wide to catch the hot flood when it came. (Lestat 157)

These graphic representations of incestuous desire are palatable —and even erotic—because they appear within the context of fantastical narratives about vampires.
When I have taught these books in English classes, students unfailingly observe that the vampires could not possibly be incestuous because "they're not human, so
human rules don't apply." One characteristic of Rice's vampires, moreover, is that they are absolutely unable to engage in sexual intercourse. All of their erotic pleasure
is directed toward drinking blood (that is, killing people). Rice hints that converting into a vampire causes the genitals to cease their sexual functioning, although she is
quite vague on this point. In other words, Rice provides readers with two ways to disavow that what they are enjoying is a story about parents and children having
sexual relations. First of all, these are monsters, and therefore somehow not parents and children. And second, these monsters cannot have sex anyway. Built into this
double denial is in fact a covert admission that indeed these characters are engaging in incest—for certainly one would not need to utterly discount the sexuality of
these vampires if indeed there were no problematic aspects to the way they choose to act on their erotic desires. Put simply, the kinds of relationships we find Rice's
vampires engaging in are highly suggestive of incest. Yet there is a certain plausible deniability built into any reading that wants to claim the vampires' relations are
strictly incestuous.
It is in this plausible deniability that one finds the Vampire Chronicles offering a way of remembering and understanding child abuse, because Rice's

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 183

representations of abuse are safely contained within the realm of pleasurable fantasy. The idea that people come to terms with memories of abuse through fantasy is a
common one in therapeutic and psychoanalytic work. Judith Herman, in her book Trauma and Recovery, explains how this kind of fantasy could operate in what she
calls "post­traumatic stress disorder." Incest or child abuse victims often suffer from this disorder, a mental state in which people imaginatively—sometimes
pathologically—attempt to come to terms with massive physical and emotional trauma suffered in the past. One of the key ways people experience post­traumatic
stress is through "reenactment":
Adults as well as children often feel impelled to re­create the moment of terror either in literal or disguised form. Sometimes people reenact the traumatic moment with a fantasy of
changing the outcome of the dangerous encounter ... traumatized people find themselves reenacting some aspect of the trauma scene in disguised form, without realizing what
they are doing. (Herman 39–40)

By reenacting, or repeating, the traumatic scene in a context over which they have imaginary control, trauma survivors are able to confront terrifying memories without
always remembering them as they really happened. This is what Herman means when she says trauma victims may reenact memories in "disguised form" or "without
really realizing what they are doing."
Reading Rice's fiction works something like a fantasy reenactment of traumatic sexual child abuse: a reader confronts issues surrounding eroticized encounters between
family members, but she encounters these threatening issues in a romantic, fantastical context. Thus people are invited to endure terrifying memories and feelings in
response to incest or child abuse without having to admit that in fact these memories and feelings are "real," in their own lives or the lives of others. One need not
actually have been an incest or child abuse victim in order to need fantasy reenactments of this sort. As Modleski notes about romance readers, fantasies about being
"taken by force" help alleviate anxieties about rape for women in general, not just rape victims. Likewise, people who are anxious about their own parenting skills or
problems with child abuse might seek representations of these traumas "in disguised form."
Having established that post­traumatic stress disorder might play a part in readers' enjoyment of Rice's horror fiction, we need to look more closely at how Rice's
horror narratives resolve problems of incest and child abuse. Partly, as already stated, Rice situates these problems in the realm of fantasy. But she also chooses a
fantasy realm in which parents and children are vampires, creatures who survive by murdering other people and each other. Interview concludes when Louis and
Claudia murder Lestat because he has mistreated

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 184

them routinely. Lestat survives this "murder," and ultimately tracks them down for a final confrontation. In Paris, having joined a group of European vampires, Lestat
helps to murder Claudia for being an "abomination," a vampire child. According to vampire law among the European vampires, vampire children are strictly forbidden
because they cannot survive on their own. While Interview seems to claim Claudia is killed merely for being a child, she is more importantly a seductive child. Louis
himself, who mourns Claudia's loss, notes that Claudia has become a child who seems to solicit pedophilic, or pseudo­incestuous, desire in her victims:
I was never very far away [from Claudia], and was always uncomfortable ... because I feared her. She'd always been the 'lost child' to her victims, the 'orphan,' and now it seemed
she would be something else, something wicked and shocking to the passers­by who succumbed to her. (Interview 208)

It is this kind of "daughter," who seems aware of the implications of her relationships with Louis or other adults, who is an "abomination" and must be killed. Thus the
seductive child is eliminated because she is a "forbidden" monster. A similar fate meets Akasha, ''Great Mother" of all vampires, in Queen of the Damned, part three
of the Chronicles. Akasha, the ancient Egyptian queen who began the vampire race thousands of years before, goes insane and tries to murder all men on Earth to
make the world a perfect matriarchy. Subsequently, a "family" of vampires—including Lestat and Louis—must murder Akasha, ostensibly to protect all the men in the
world from certain death. But Akasha is more than an exceptionally violent vampire. In Queen, we discover that a "demon" lives in vampire blood who links all the
vampires together—this demon is especially strong in Akasha's blood, and if Akasha is killed all the vampires will die as well. This problem is solved when twin
vampire sisters, Akasha's "first daughters," kill Akasha and eat her heart and brain (Queen 456). What I would point out here is that Akasha serves as the emblem and
reminder of the fact that all the vampires share the same blood. They are all Akasha's children—with the same blood in their veins—and they are all therefore "related"
in some way. This information calls attention to the incestuous overtones in many of the vampires' relationships. Like Claudia, Akasha becomes an abomination to the
vampires and must be eliminated. Characters such as Claudia and Akasha who threaten to make the incestuous fantasy of the Chronicles too literal become "monsters
to the monsters" and must die.
But this kind of "kill the bad guy" resolution is far more complicated than it might seem at first glance. Killing off the "really bad" (or too­literally incestuous) vampires is
another form of denial at work in this fantasy. For all the vampires are pseudo­incestuous monsters (like Claudia), and all of them routinely kill human beings (like
Akasha). Blaming, then eliminating, individual

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 185

vampires for being "abominations" calls attention away from the ordinary abominable acts Rice's other vampires engage in nightly (killing humans and having romances
with their "family members"). Most importantly, it calls readers' attention away from violence and incest in the human world. This fantasy structure—in which bad
individuals take the blame for general misery—resembles "internalization," another symptom of post­traumatic stress disorder. Herman writes that child abuse survivors
often cope with their trauma by blaming themselves for what others have done to them, thus allowing their families to appear blameless and worthy of love. People
who blame themselves for their abuse do so by generating fantasies in which they are inherently bad or evil and therefore "deserve'' everything that has happened to
them:
The language of the self becomes a language of abomination. Survivors routinely describe themselves as outside the compact of ordinary human relations, as supernatural
creatures or nonhuman life forms. They think of themselves as witches, vampires, whores, dogs, rats, or snakes. ... By developing a contaminated, stigmatized identity, the child
victim takes the evil of the abuser into herself and thereby preserves her primary attachments to her parents. (Herman 105)

In the Vampire Chronicles, there is no single "self" who takes the blame away from a single family perpetrating incest or abuse, but there is an entire community of
monsters who can take the blame for human crimes. These monsters are "outside the compact of ordinary human relations," and therefore cannot help the fact that
they are perverse by human standards. By generating a series of sympathetic and monstrous "selves" readers can identify with, Rice sets up a version of internalization
in her fiction. Readers are reassured that human families are not "bad" because "only vampires would act like that." Whenever these vampires come too close to
reminding us of human family dysfunction, they are eliminated anyway—because they deserve it.
Internalization fantasies—in which bad monsters deserve the abuse they get—come up repeatedly in the Witch Cycle, which contains three of Rice's more recent
books. These lengthy novels chronicle the history of the Mayfair family through thirteen generations. Each generation contains one "witch" who can communicate and
have erotic encounters with a polymorphous demon named Lasher. (Lasher, by the way, is the same type of demon we saw in the Vampire Chronicles living in the
vampires' blood.) The Witch Cycle contains the only literal representations of incest we get in any of Rice's fiction, and it also contains some of the most graphic
portrayals of violent monsters as well. Before I discuss the literal incestuous relations in these novels, I want to lay out the fantasy incest monster scenario. Lasher, who
yearns to

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 186

become human, is finally "born" at the end of The Witching Hour when his spirit "merges" with the fetus inside the thirteenth generation witch, Rowan Mayfair.
Rowan, Lasher's "mother," is kidnapped, held prisoner, and raped by Lasher in the second novel Lasher and is forced to bear his daughter, with whom he also
copulates and plans to have a child. One of Lasher's monstrous properties limits his ability to father children unless he can find a person who has genetic material
compatible with his own. Only Rowan and Lasher's daughter Emaleth have that genetic material. Lasher ends with one of the most startling pseudo­incestuous
fantasies I have ever encountered, which mirrors the ''eating the mother" scene at the end of Queen of the Damned. Rowan, nearly dead, is revived when she kills
Emaleth and then drinks her dead daughter's breast milk:
[Rowan] shot three bullets into the girl's face ... "Oh, Emaleth, oh, baby, oh, little Emaleth," she sobbed. The girl lay dead, her arms out, her shirt open, face a soft mass of blood. ...
And then [Rowan] closed her mouth again on the girl's breast. The room was still. No sound but the sound of suckling. Rowan drank from the left breast and then moved to the
other, sucking as ravenously as before. ... At last she sat back, wiping her mouth, and a low sad groan came from her, and another sob. (Lasher 557–8)

Emaleth is killed because she is unable to do anything but give birth to more monsters like her father. But I would argue that, like Claudia, Emaleth must be eliminated
because she is a reminder of incest.
The Witching Hour, which is primarily the story of Rowan and her witch ancestors, introduces us to the Mayfair family and Lasher's relationship with them. A great
deal of The Witching Hour is a "case file" on the Mayfair family compiled by the Talamasca, a secret society which has been investigating paranormal phenomena
since the Middle Ages. Descriptions of Rowan's own deepening relationship with Lasher are intercut with passages from this "case file," which begins in the early
fifteenth century with the first Mayfair witch who can summon the demon Lasher. In Rice's mythology, demons are beings who are only dimly intelligent, and often
appear self­aware only because they are able to mimic the human beings who summon them. Rice makes it clear that Lasher is attracted to the Mayfair witches
because, in mimicking them, he becomes self­conscious and human; in other words, Lasher's identity can only be a reflection of the Mayfair family he emulates. Like
other demons in Rice's work, the mostly invisible Lasher is able to cause small rainstorms, move objects, and appear to the women who conjure him (whom he can
also "touch," particularly in a sexual manner). Because the ability to summon demons is an inherited trait, Lasher is passed down from generation to generation in the
Mayfair family. Once the family has amassed great wealth on a

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 187

colonial­era plantation, they begin a tradition of incest and inbreeding which seems to culminate with Julien Mayfair, the only man to whom Lasher ever appears. Julien
lives during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries and is Rowan's great­great grandfather. He has a daughter by his sister Katherine named Mary Beth, and also has a
daughter by Mary Beth. Rowan's grandmother is a product of the union between Mary Beth's daughter Stella and Mary Beth's brother Cortland. Rowan, in other
words, is the result of several generations of incest. And Lasher seems to follow the most incestuous strain in the family, attaching himself to Julien's own incestuous
forebears and later serving Julien's offspring in particular.
Lasher is also fond of imitating Julien's appearance; when he does "appear" to the Mayfair witches, he takes on the guise of Julien as a young man. That is, Lasher is
strongly identified with Julien, who has a predilection for incestuous relationships. Lasher's significance as a figure who stands in for the family's incestuous relations
becomes particularly clear in a description of Julien's sister Katherine. The narrator of the Talamasca "case file" writes, "But other than the tales of incest, which
characterize the Mayfair history since the time of Jeanne Louise and Pierre [Mayfair], there are no occult stories about Katherine" (Witching Hour 393). What is
noteworthy about this passage is the slippage between "tales of incest" and "occult stories.'' Here we see the extent to which Rice tends to conflate incest and the
occult, a move which robs incest of its reality while at the same time strongly associating it with a mythical figure who is destroyed by the end of Lasher.
I would point out that Lasher, besides being a supernatural monster, is also Rowan's child. He is therefore associated with an entire family history of incest and he
becomes the final product of that family when Rowan helps him to merge with the body of her unborn baby. Lasher is both perpetrator and progeny of incest. One
might attribute Lasher's dual role to the effect of internalization fantasies at work in the Witch Cycle, where Lasher becomes the child who takes the blame for his
family's abuse. Lasher performs a function similar to Rice's vampires: he is the fantasy figure who acts out both the crimes and the guilt of an abusive family. Lasher's
position as child and perpetrator of incest, I would argue, is not necessarily a locus of identification for child abuse victims engaging in internalization. He might just as
easily be a figure for the kind of projection that goes on in abusive families when a parent blames his child for being "seductive" or "bad" and therefore deserving of
rape or beatings. That is, Lasher is the kind of "child" we might find in the fantasies of a parent who wishes to disavow guilt or responsibility for having abused a child.
Furthermore, we discover in Taltos, the third book of the Witch Cycle, that Lasher is a deviant and unnaturally evil member of a race of good beings known as the
"Taltos." Ash, a benevolent Taltos, tells Rowan and her husband the history of his race, who are nothing like the violent and hypersexual

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 188

Lasher. This further confirms our sense that Lasher, like Claudia or Akasha, is a monster among monsters who deserves any punishment he might get.
In fact, Lasher's rape and abuse of Rowan make it possible for Rice to convert the Witch Cycle into a story about a parent's revenge upon a child who has abused
her. At the conclusion of Lasher, when Rowan kills both Lasher and Emaleth, it would seem that Rowan has in fact come to occupy the position of child in relation to
her own children. Rowan nurses from Emaleth after killing her, as if Emaleth were in fact a "parent" to her mother. Lasher and Emaleth's instantaneous growth into
adults directly after being born underscores my point. By blurring the line between parent and child, Rice generates a fictional space in which children can be cast as
perpetrators of child abuse. Rice's representations of parents and children help to explain her habit of inviting readers to identify with characters like Lasher and Lestat,
who repeatedly abuse their "families." The Witch Cycle and the Vampire Chronicles begin with books told from the point of view of individuals who are hurt or abused
by characters who later become sympathetic protagonists. While Lasher is the frightening, overwhelming monster in The Witching Hour, he tells his own story in
Lasher and explains why it is that he has behaved so ruthlessly. Lasher is certainly a story about how Lasher abuses Rowan, but it is more importantly a story of
Lasher's own history of abuse; we discover he has been "born" to human parents before who forced him to participate in humiliating pagan rituals, neglected him, and
scorned him. In fact, Lasher believes he is a reincarnation of ''Saint Ashlar," who Rice connects to a pagan­influenced Protestant church in Scotland. We discover that
Lasher is no monster, but actually a saint who cannot help but desire to reproduce—his need to reproduce incestuously, it turns out, is built into the rituals of Saint
Ashlar. Lasher is represented as a victim of the very sexuality which he has used to victimize his mother and daughter. He is adult and child, perpetrator and victim.
Likewise, the Vampire Chronicles begin with Louis' story in Interview, but the second novel The Vampire Lestat is told from Lestat's point of view (and, like
Lasher, is named for its protagonist). While Lestat is a cold and manipulative character in Louis' story, we discover in The Vampire Lestat that Lestat has himself
been used and hurt. Like Lasher, Lestat tells a story about his painful intimate relationships which is intended to solicit readers' sympathy and make his crimes against
Louis and Claudia both understandable and forgivable. In these monster stories about child abuse, all of the characters ultimately appear to be victims in the end. Rice
invites readers to feel deeply ambivalent about characters who are abusive: at any moment, we might discover that these abusers are victims too, and therefore we
cannot hold them responsible for their cruelty to others. The safe space where Rice stages and masks sexualized child abuse is therefore a safe space for both
perpetrators and victims. It is a

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 189

space where the line between victim and perpetrator is impossible to draw, and therefore Rice makes it impossible to judge whether or not child abuse is in fact
abusive at all.
Sexual and Economic "Safe Spaces"
While Rice's explicitly supernatural narratives tend to disavow abusive sexuality or relegate it to the realm of the occult, her pornography, erotica, and historical novels
do precisely the opposite. The Sleeping Beauty trilogy (The Claiming of Sleeping Beauty, Beauty's Punishment, and Beauty's Release) and Exit to Eden are
Rice's most explicit sadomasochistic novels, and all offer graphic representations of what might be considered "perversity" or "obscenity" to their readers. The erotic
romance Belinda and historical novel Cry to Heaven are not about sadomasochism, but nevertheless fall into the category of ''perversity." I use the terms "perversity"
and "obscenity" advisedly, to designate sexual acts which do not conform to an admittedly narrow definition of mainstream heteronormative sexuality. 1 These novels
celebrate coercive sexuality, and hinge upon erotic fantasies variously involving rape, bondage, castration, and pedophilia. What connects the erotica and historical
novels to the Witch Cycle and the Vampire Chronicles is Rice's use of "safe" fantasy spaces, and a broadening investment in the idea that victims and perpetrators of
abuse can achieve a measure of freedom by switching positions with each other.
Exit to Eden serves as a kind of commentary on the way safe fantasy space gets set up in the Sleeping Beauty trilogy, and in fact the Sleeping Beauty novels
themselves are referred to by a character in Exit to Eden as "erotic classics" (Exit 16). Exit is the story of Lisa, a young woman who works as a trainer at "The
Club," an exclusive, private resort where people pay to participate in sadomasochistic fantasies of their choice. The Club is divided up into masters, slaves, and
trainers, and each group performs a different role. Masters are The Club's "clients," the wealthy patrons who come to be erotically serviced. Slaves are paid—by
contract—to be trained as people who will service the masters. Lisa describes how The Club works as a safe space:
The Club frightens the slaves at first. It terrifies them. But in a real way, The Club is a great womb. It's an immense community where no one is ever abandoned, and the lights
never go out. No real pain or damage is ever inflicted. There are never any accidents at The Club. (11)

Lisa describes The Club as a place where "no real pain or damage is ever inflicted," and yet notes that its slaves are terrified by it. That is, while The Club does not
"really" hurt its slaves, it certainly arouses genuine emotions in

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 190

them. Here we see Rice setting up a boundary between ritualized (that is, pleasurable) abuse and "real" abuse or "real" sexuality. But no such boundary exists between
emotions experienced in sadomasochistic ritual and emotions felt in "reality." This is a telling contradiction that recurs throughout Rice's pornography: "real" violence
may not be occurring, but real emotions of terror and pain may result.
One of the ways Rice builds her insular pornographic spaces is through the super­abundant wealth her characters often take for granted. The Club caters to the richest
and most well­connected people in the world; or rather, its masters are wealthy, while its slaves are paid (though we understand that they may simply "choose" to be
paid and perhaps do not really need the money). That is, The Club is a safe space mostly because characters pay to make it so. Located on a privately­owned island
off the Florida coast, The Club is an extremely elite and expensive vacation spot. Understood this way, s/m sex at The Club is just another high­priced diversion with
fashion accessories. Furthermore, its inhabitants are not only safe from "real" sexual violence, but also the kind of violence motivated by poverty they might encounter
in crime­ridden urban areas. The Club is "safe" for s/m, but more importantly it is a "safe" enclave for the upper­class.
In the fairy tale style aristocrats of the Sleeping Beauty trilogy, we find another demonstration of how class relations tie into s/m safe spaces. Slaves in these novels are
young aristocrats (princes and princesses mostly) who are being "trained" in brutally erotic ways to prepare them to take their places in the ruling class. To become a
truly gifted queen, the princess Beauty must first be degraded and abused by "the Queen" of the s/m castle where the first two novels take place. Here, "private" and
"safe" forms of sexual abuse are intended to prepare young people to exercise public power as members of the aristocracy. Furthermore, the most "unsafe'' and
terrifying punishments the characters endure take place "in town," where they are sold to commoners who sexually assault them and force them to work at menial jobs
tending bar or grooming horses. It is clear that the menial jobs are far worse punishment than the sexual assaults.
Robert Stoller describes sadomasochistic sexual fantasies as revisions of early traumatic experiences in which people learn to convert remembered pain into pleasure.
"The trauma in each perversion script ... is converted to a triumph. The attackers of earlier times are defeated, undone, unable to persist in their attack. ... Now the
victim is the victor and the trauma a triumph. ... If the story is well­constructed, one feels guiltless and without anxiety" (Stoller 32). Stoller's observations offer a way
of understanding how Rice's pornography might work as a psychological defense against the kinds of abuse it reenacts. Part of the purpose of these fantasies for
readers might be, as Stoller suggests, symbolic mastery over remembered experiences of domination (sexual or otherwise)

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 191

which they did wish to participate in and which certainly did not afford them pleasure. Furthermore, Rice's tendency to confuse sexual and economic subordination
would lead readers away from naming one possible source of their trauma: having to perform the kinds of menial jobs which, for characters in the Sleeping Beauty
trilogy, are merely another part of an s/m sex game.
Readers' ability to feel pleasure—and even have an orgasm—while reading about sexual humiliation and subjugation might be considered one way of masking painful
feelings about their class and social positions. Class division generates many forms of social abuse which might seem to mirror the polarized roles and abuse we find in
s/m gaming. However, the "bottom" in s/m abuse ultimately gets as much—if not more—pleasure as the "top." Rarely do we find the "bottom" class in a capitalist
society getting anything other than abuse from ''tops"; certainly there is no pleasure in an underclass position. Conflating class division with s/m role division invites us to
believe that the underclass gets just as much gratification from its position as the ruling class does. The Sleeping Beauty trilogy, of course, promises that all "bottoms"
will eventually be "tops" both sexually and as a class.
Additionally, Rice's pornography and erotica suggest that romantic "liberation" from sexual gaming comes when male and female sexual roles can be made fluid and
interchangeable. For example, in Exit, Elliott falls in love with Lisa when she puts on a "double phallus" and has anal sex with him as if she were a man. Rice is careful
to represent Elliott responding to Lisa's female/male body as particularly seductive:
She lowered the phallus and pushed one end of it up and into herself ... the other end curving outwards, and toward me just exactly as if she were a woman with an erect cock. The
image was stunning: her delicate form and the gleaming cock rising so perfectly from the tangled curly hair. ... Then came that exquisite feeling of penetration, of being opened,
that gorgeous violation as the oiled cock went in. (Exit 121)

Later, the two reverse positions and Elliott says, "I went on fucking her harder ... than I ever fucked anything or anyone—male or female, whore or hustler, or
powerless phantom of my imagination—in my life" (Exit 123). He is able to experience a kind of sexuality with Lisa that transcends gender and even material reality.
This lays the foundation for their emotional bond. Of course, Lisa and Elliott's "trading off" is largely sexual, and within the context of role playing. Nevertheless, it
might be said to offer readers a sense that liberation from traditional gender roles is possible, and therefore to make the space of sadomasochistic fantasy all the more
alluring. To the extent that gender roles can be compared to class positions, this fantasy about fluid identity can be said to hide another fantasy about cash fluidity.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 192

There is even a degree to which Rice's position of authorship defies traditional gender roles, and makes her pornographic representations seem not merely "safe" but
"liberatory." Pornography, as critics like Andrea Dworkin have argued, is most often considered a "male genre.'' Dworkin writes that "strains of male power are
intrinsic to both the substance and production of pornography" (Dworkin 24). But what happens if a woman is responsible for the "substance and production of
pornography"? Many contemporary feminists would argue that Rice is in some ways "subverting" the structure of domination Dworkin criticizes in pornography, and
that by occupying an authorial voice so often reserved for men Rice challenges the idea that women are different from—and subordinate to—men. Theorist Judith
Butler argues that when women take on or imitate aspects of male identity "both [genders] lose their internal stability and distinctness from each other" (Butler 123).
What Butler consistently ignores in her analysis is the way certain forms of "distinctness" get maintained even as gender roles wither away. Not only is Rice taking on a
"male" identity as a pornographer, but she is also taking on the identity of a capitalist who makes money at it. Pornography is one of the most notorious "spaces" in
which sexuality and economics intermingle. Thus, "subverting" gender identity in the context of pornography does not necessarily mean subverting power and authority
in general. One form of hierarchy (gender) may simply be swapped for another (class). Specifically, we might understand Rice's fluid gender roles as a simultaneous
repetition of and protest against class roles—particularly abusive ones.
Cry to Heaven, Rice's historical novel about castrati opera singers in eighteenth­century Italy, speaks directly to the way non­traditional gendered identity is bound up
with an absorption/rejection of ruling class authority. 2 Tonio, the main character, is a young man from a family of statesmen whose father Carlo has him castrated and
sent away to live among eunuchs for political reasons. Subsequently, Tonio becomes a famous opera singer who can play both male and female parts on stage. In
large part, this novel is a celebration of Tonio's ambiguous sexuality, his love affair with his singing teacher Guido (another eunuch), and late Renaissance Italy. At the
same time, its plot is something like a "rape revenge" narrative, for the novel's climax comes when Tonio is able to confront and kill his father for having mutilated and
abandoned him. Carol Clover has described the rape revenge narrative in film as a genre in which male audience members identify with a female hero who stalks and
often kills her former rapists. The rape revenge narrative can be understood as a site in which gender role swapping is foregrounded: male audience members identify
with its heroine because she takes on a "masculine"—that is, violent—role in order to avenge her own abuse (Clover 114–165). Tonio's castration is described as a
form of rape: "He felt his legs forced apart, hearing the cloth rip before the cold air touched his nakedness.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 193

'NOOOO!' he was roaring between clenched teeth" (Cry 136). Moreover, in a telling reproduction of the terms of Clover's argument, Tonio is able to get revenge
upon Carlo by dressing up as a woman and posing as a prostitute to seduce him. Although Tonio reveals his true identity while dressed as a woman and kissing Carlo
on the lips, he changes into men's clothing before killing him. Carlo interprets Tonio's actions as "too clever," for the only times Carlo is unguarded are when he visits
prostitutes.
What Tonio has lost in his castration, besides his literal maleness, is also his "male entitlement," or rather the money and social position he might have inherited had he
remained both a man and Carlo's son. He has been violated economically as well as sexually. To recover, Tonio finds a "safe space" in which he can gain a form of
wealth and prestige which is comparable to his father's. He becomes a famous and sought­after opera singer, who travels in the same powerful circles as political
figures. Tonio's ability to perform as both a man and a woman is not specifically what enables him to wreak violent revenge upon his abusive father. Tonio can only be
a man/woman because he is already a member of the privileged "artist" class, with access to money and powerful social connections. These connections, and the
money required to maintain them, are most importantly what help Tonio enter Carlo's territory undetected, armed, and prepared to escape quickly. Tonio rejects his
father's authority, but he does it by imitating it in nearly every way: Tonio uses political power and violence to destroy his father, just as his father once used these
methods to destroy him.
Making Money
Revenge upon authority—this time maternal—returns in Rice's erotic romance novel Belinda. This is Rice's only novel in which adult­child sexual relations are
explored in a literal sense. Belinda is the sixteen­year­old lover of forty­four­year­old Jeremy Walker, an author of children's books about little girls. Jeremy is
wrestling with the influence of his dead mother, a writer of historical romances who requested that he continue to write under her name after her death. We discover
Jeremy's deepest secret is that he wrote his mother's last two novels, which were both smash hits. Belinda meets Jeremy while on the run from her mother, a suicidal,
neglectful actress named Bonnie who has tried to shoot Belinda for sleeping with her current husband. During the course of their affair, Jeremy begins to paint nude
portraits of Belinda, occasionally putting her in settings reminiscent of his children's books (in one portrait, she is surrounded by dolls). His representations of their
sexual relationship in these paintings become an act of revenge for both of them; Jeremy wants to use them to "commit suicide" as a children's author and escape from

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 194

having to identify with and paint little girls, while Belinda wants to get revenge upon her mother, who has tried to ruin Belinda's career as an actress.
Jeremy and Belinda wish to use the "Belinda paintings" to embark upon new career paths. That is, their revenge will be fame and fortune. Just as Tonio's revenge upon
Carlo was a simultaneous embodiment and rejection of parental authority, so too is Jeremy and Belinda's. They are enslaved by the memories and authority of their
mothers because their mothers are famous and wealthy artists. Furthermore, both—but particularly Belinda—have been unable to escape their mothers' authority
because they have been dependent upon an inheritance (or payments) for their livelihood. In Jeremy's case, this is somewhat more complicated, for his children's
books have made him independently wealthy; however, as Belinda points out to him, the content of his children's books—which are about little girls who live in huge
Victorian homes—demonstrate that he feels like a little girl trapped in his mother's house. Jeremy's mother has even left him her name in her will so that he can continue
to write her books after she is dead. He therefore struggles with the burden of having inherited not only her money, but also her identity as a writer.
What I would point out about Belinda is that it, of all Rice's books, comes closest to literally representing what is at stake in her pornography, historical fantasy, and
gothic horror fiction: that is, the way class identity is the foundational trauma against which Rice defensively generates fantasies of fluid parent/child and male/female
roles. In effect, what I want to argue is that Rice's fantasies in which abusive relationships become pleasurable or ambiguous are ways of thinking through the abuse
and pleasure generated by capitalism. I do not wish to claim that all trauma in Rice's work is strictly economic, but I do want to call attention to the way class returns
again and again as the buried term around which all other forms of abuse coalesce and become coherent. Because Belinda comes so close to admitting how salient
class issues really are to its main characters, it is also the novel in which we confront most explicitly the results of child abuse and sexual transgression. You might say
Belinda is a novel markedly without a "safe space": it does not take place in a fantasy realm, or within an occult story, or in history. I would suggest that the fantasy of
adult/child sexual relations, which informs Rice's gothic horror and erotica, must become explicit in Belinda as a kind of distraction from the narrative about class
trauma, and upward mobility as a form of reenactment and revenge. 3 The moment at which the repressed term of economic class threatens to become conscious is
also the moment at which we are invited to become utterly shocked and absorbed by a flagrantly literal fantasy of pederasty.
Now I want to backtrack for a moment and reexamine abusive relations in Rice's horror and erotic narratives as figures for capitalist class relations. I contended
earlier that one might characterize the "family units" in the Vampire Chronicles as abusive, and in particular as incestuous. Interview, the first novel,

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 195

is Louis' firsthand account of the way Lestat abused him and their "child" Claudia. But what cements the bond between Lestat and Louis? What is it that has brought
about their abusive relationship in the first place? Quite simply, Louis' money. Louis is the son of a wealthy plantation owner, and Lestat is an impoverished noble's son
from France. Lestat has no idea how to manage his finances, and for this reason he chooses to make Louis into a vampire: Louis can be his companion, and quite
literally, his accountant. Louis says:
Lestat had always known how to steal from victims chosen for their sumptuous dress and other promising signs of extravagance. But I suspected that beneath [Lestat's]
gentleman's veneer he was painfully ignorant of the most simple financial matters. But I was not. And so he could acquire cash at any moment and I could invest it ... and so for
that he had ushered me into the preternatural world that he might acquire an investor and manager for whom these skills of mortal life became most valuable in this life after.
(Interview 38–39)

Later, Louis says that Lestat "could persuade me to kill a child, but not to part with my money" (Interview 96). Integral to their "family," then, is not just Lestat's
abusive emotional power, but also Louis' control of their money. Furthermore, when the vampire "family" triumphs over Akasha at the end of Queen, they declare their
solidarity with one another—and celebrate their triumph over the kind of abuse perpetrated by Akasha—by opening an elite, expensive mall in Miami together where
they can shop and hunt for mortals. In the last chapter of Queen, we follow Lestat as he walks through the mall, which is connected to a mansion where the vampires
live together. As he gazes at the stores and the items for sale, he also watches people walk by and hungers for their blood. Finally, he has to leave the mall because he
realizes "somebody is going to die'' (Queen 474) if he keeps shopping. What I would want to point out is that Rice's vampires are not just a kind of projection of the
dysfunctional family into the realm of fantasy; for this fantasy hinges on their identities as capitalists who steal money and blood from their victims to become rich and
remain immortal. The idea that capitalists become wealthy through robbing and killing is as traumatic—and, in many ways, as true—as the idea that families can be
sources of abuse and violation. That these kinds of traumas get spoken together in Rice's work is therefore not surprising. That both ideas must remain mystified by
their association with fantastical monsters is equally unsurprising.
The Witch Cycle figures the intertwined traumas of economic and family relations in the demon Lasher. Lasher, as I noted above, is both source and result of the
Mayfair family's history of incest. He is also the source of their enormous wealth, and in fact the Mayfair witch that he chooses to consort

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 196

with in each generation is dubbed inheritor of "the legacy." "The legacy" is the Mayfair fortune. Therefore, Lasher represents what is popularly called ''the cycle of
abuse," which gets handed down from generation to generation in dysfunctional families and he represents a vast amount of money handed down as well. In fact, what
has held the Mayfair family together in spite of its incestuous and violent tendencies is its accumulation of money. Like the capitalist vampires, Lasher has made the
Mayfairs wealthy through stealing and spying on their business competitors. To a certain extent, the Witch Cycle is a fantastical rendering of the same issues at stake in
Belinda: characters are locked into abusive family relationships because they depend upon an inheritance to maintain their class identities.
Taltos, the third novel of the Witch Cycle, provides another example of the way class seems to structure supernatural monstrosity. As I mentioned earlier, a "good"
Taltos named Ash is introduced in this novel; he ultimately explains that Lasher is a Taltos who has become a vengeful, insane spirit. Rice convinces us that Ash is
different from Lasher in two basic ways: he abstains from sex, and he is the impossibly wealthy CEO of a corporation that mass­produces children's toys. Ash
speculates that capitalist mass production might even be a form of salvation, and thinks to himself that "This commerce, this endless multiplicity of beautiful and useful
things, could save the world, ultimately" (Taltos 8). Rather than producing children, as Lasher does, Ash produces things for them to buy. The message seems to be
that monsters are good if they are independently wealthy. Lasher's wealth is parasitic upon the Mayfairs—he has had to attach himself to a family in order to make
money, and to inherit that money he has to make sure he is born into the family at some point. While Lasher is demonized and killed, Ash is rewarded: finally, Ash
ends up "marrying" a Taltos born to Mona Mayfair, the young witch Rowan has named the next "designee" of the Mayfair fortune. Taltos ends with an exultant,
mystical sex scene in which Ash and Morrigan Mayfair (Mona's Taltos baby) are joined at last. The distinction between human and monster ends up appearing far less
important than the distinction between rich and poor: a wealthy monster can marry into a wealthy human family.
While both Rice's horror fiction and her erotic fiction contain numerous depictions of fluid family and gender roles, her characters exist in a rigidly hierarchical class
framework. In some sense, Rice's vampires, witches, and sexual adventurers toy with their identities precisely because they are securely positioned as upper middle­
class. Lisa, of Exit to Eden, has simultaneously taken up sadomasochistic role­playing games and achieved an upper­middle class status. Telling the story of her
affiliation with The Club, she says:
I'd made more money at twenty­seven than I'd ever dreamed I'd make in a lifetime. Now and then I'd try to remember what it was like when I wanted

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 197
all those gold­covered lipsticks at Bill's Drugs on Shattuck Avenue, and only had a quarter for a pack of gum. (Exit 5)

Her money and her sexual role­playing are inextricably linked. I would also point out that in the fourth installment of the Vampire Chronicles, The Tale of the Body
Thief, Lestat switches bodies with a human being and becomes impoverished. As soon as he is in a mortal body, he is rendered powerless (and violently ill) because
the "body thief" who has taken Lestat's vampire body has also seized control of Lestat's bank accounts. Lestat, without money, nearly freezes to death because he has
no place to sleep. Becoming human, in Tale, is to surrender economic power. This solidifies an already­existing connection between Rice's vampires and a fantasized
capitalist class. Economic identity is fluid in Rice's novels (to the extent that characters like Lisa and Lestat do rise and fall in class status), but only in a limited sense.
Unlike the fluidity of family and gender roles, class fluidity is accompanied by disaster. Becoming poor is associated with mortality, desperation, and horror. Rarely do
her characters become poor; in fact, nearly all of Rice's characters are upwardly mobile or already wealthy. The Feast of All Saints, for example, is the chronicle of a
community of people trying to become middle­class. Characters in Feast who do not make it out of poverty die or become "kept women."
Finally, Rice's portraits of fluid power relations in families and sexual couplings take place within the context of abuse and sadomasochism because they represent an
effort to come to grips with (and yet deny) the painful intractability of class identity. Lynn Chancer has postulated that:
The relationship between capitalist and worker is analogous to a sadomasochistic one: sadomasochism may be a social fact of life under capitalist systems like that in the United
States. Like sadomasochism, U.S. capitalism is based on a conditional form of social psychology that brings severe repercussions—the potential loss of livelihood, itself symbolic
of the ability to live—should it be questioned too independently. (Chancer 122)

That is, sadomasochism is itself installed in our economic relations. Furthermore, family relations (abusive or not) can in large part be conducive to sadomasochistic
relations. Jessica Benjamin suggests that the bond between parent and child sets up a relationship in which one person—the parent—is always dominant, and the
other—the child—always submits. She attributes people's absorption with sadomasochistic role playing to their early desire (as children) to be recognized as the
parents' equal. Having failed at this, the child becomes invested in forms of recognition which are sadomasochistic: the sadist is always recognized, and the masochist is
always the bestower of recognition. In other words, sadomasochism is a crippled desire for mutuality, in which the

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 198

labor of recognition is divided up between two people. Certainly, as we find in Rice's work, the task of recognition can be traded back and forth between partners,
but "pleasure is still viewed as something to be negotiated within an acknowledged structure of power" (Williams 171).
Rice's work functions so exceptionally well as compensatory fantasy because she portrays all social roles as fluid and interchangeable. Yet, the identities meted out to
individuals within the family, gender, and the economy are often static: rarely do children have the power or the ability to abuse their parents; rarely do women
dominate men sexually as often as men dominate women sexually; and rarely do members of the underclass become wealthy capitalists. Her fantasies speak directly to
a painful problem people encounter in hierarchical culture, particularly when hierarchy makes possible sadomasochistic and abusive relationships. Rice's fictional
narratives offer fantasy compensation to readers who may feel themselves constrained by their identities, and particularly if their identities have made them vulnerable
to abuse. But the safe spaces in Rice's work, while they certainly offer a kind of liberation from constraining roles, tend to reproduce the abuser­abused binary. That
is, the "hook" in Rice's narratives is a fantasy of fluidity within hierarchy, rather than a fantasy of dismantling of hierarchy altogether.
Notes
1. I would point out, however, that in recent years (particularly during the late 1980s and early 1990s), s/m sexual gaming has entered the mainstream, and in
particular has become a hotly­debated issue among feminists. Post­feminist icon Madonna has represented herself in videos and her book Sex as a participant in s/m
scenarios, and feminist critics from Camille Paglia to Jessica Benjamin have acknowledged its importance for understanding contemporary sexual arrangements.
2. Anne Rice's book, The Feast of All Saints, tells a similar story, in which gendered and sexual ambiguity gets replaced by racial ambiguity. The characters in this
historical novel are all of mixed racial descent, and their fluid or dual identities seem to give them the same kinds of properties as Rice's bisexual characters (and, in
fact, some of the characters in Feast are bisexual). These mixed­race characters also challenge parental authority by simultaneously embodying it and rejecting it.
3. In "Family Romances," Freud writes that part of the structure of a "family romance" involves a child's search for a family "grander and more aristocratic" than his
own with which to identify. This is, Freud postulates, partly an act of revenge and partly an act of transcendence: "the child's imagination becomes engaged in the task
of getting free from the parents of whom he now has a low opinion and of replacing them by others who as a rule are of higher social standing" (Gay, The Freud
Reader 299). Freud is suggesting a connection between fantasies of upward mobility and revenge upon one's family.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 199

Works Cited
Benjamin, Jessica. The Bonds of Love: Psychoanalysis, Feminism, and the Problem of Domination. New York: Pantheon, 1988.
Butler, Judith. Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of Identity. New York: Routledge, 1990.
Chancer, Lynn. Sadomasochism in Everyday Life: The Dynamics of Power and Powerlessness. New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press, 1992.
Clover, Carol. Men, Women, and Chainsaws: Gender in the Modern Horror Film. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1992.
Dworkin, Andrea. Pornography: Men Possessing Women. New York: Plume, 1979.
Gay, Peter, ed. The Freud Reader. London: Norton, 1989.
Herman, Judith Lewis. Trauma and Recovery: The Aftermath of Violence—From Domestic Abuse to Political Terror. New York: Basic Books, 1992.
Jameson, Fredric. The Political Unconscious: Narrative as a Socially Symbolic Act. New York: Cornell University Press, 1981.
Modleski, Tania. Loving with a Vengeance: Mass­Produced Fantasies for Women. New York: Routledge, 1982.
Rice, Anne (writing as Anne Rampling). Belinda. New York: Jove, 1986.
Rice, Anne. (writing as A. N. Roquelaure). The Claiming of Sleeping Beauty. New York: Plume, 1983.
Rice, Anne. (writing as Anne Rampling). Cry to Heaven. New York: Pinnacle, 1982.
Rice, Anne. (writing as Anne Rampling). Exit to Eden. New York: Dell, 1985.
Rice, Anne (writing as Anne Rampling). The Feast Of All Saints. New York: Ballantine, 1979.
Rice, Anne (writing as Anne Rampling). Interview with the Vampire. New York: Ballantine, 1976.
Rice, Anne (writing as Anne Rampling). Lasher. New York: Knopf, 1993.
Rice, Anne (writing as Anne Rampling). The Queen of the Damned. New York: Ballantine, 1988.
Rice, Anne (writing as Anne Rampling). The Tale of the Body Thief. New York: Knopf, 1992.
Rice, Anne (writing as Anne Rampling). Taltos. New York: Knopf, 1994.
Rice, Anne (writing as Anne Rampling). The Vampire Lestat. New York: Ballantine, 1985.
Rice, Anne (writing as Anne Rampling). The Witching Hour. New York: Knopf, 1990.
Stoller, Robert J. Observing the Erotic Imagination. New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 1985.
Williams, Linda. Hard Core: Power, Pleasure, and the "Frenzy of the Visible." Berkeley: University of California Press, 1989.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 201

On Blues, Autobiography, and Performative Utterance: The Jouissance of Alberta Hunter
Kari J. Winter
Throughout the twentieth century, African American women blues artists have been rich sources of feminist and African American self­affirmation. Hazel Carby, in her
path­breaking essay "It Jus Be's Dat Way Sometimes: The Sexual Politics of Women's Blues," argues that because women blues singers have existed outside the pale
of respectability, they "frequently appear as liminal figures that play out and explore the various possibilities of a sexual existence; they are representations of women
who attempt to manipulate and control their construction as sexual subjects" (12). Building on Carby's analysis and focusing on the work of the great blues performer
Alberta Hunter, I will investigate three issues. First, does it make sense, in the context of blues culture, to connect writing to safety? Second, in what ways does
Alberta Hunter's work trouble the entrenched feminist belief that a woman artist's "I" is autobiographical (self­written, self­disclosing, and self­authorizing)? And finally,
if Alberta Hunter sought neither safety nor autobiographical expression, what did her artistry achieve for her?
Blues
In his influential essay, "The World and the Jug," Ralph Ellison signifies on the image of the world as an imprisoning jug:
[Irving] Howe seems to see segregation as an opaque steel jug with the Negroes inside waiting for some black messiah to come along and blow the cork. ... But if we are in a jug it
is transparent, not opaque, and one is allowed not only to see outside but to read what is going on out there; to make identifications as to values and human quality. (116)

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 202

If, as Ellison argues, liberal white northerners have seen blacks as trapped in a jug of racists' creation, African Americans have created self­empowering metaphors for
their lives even from within the prison of oppression. Ellison is playing with an image he inherited from a blues song written forty years earlier by Alberta Hunter. Called
"Down­Hearted Blues," the song launched both Hunter and Bessie Smith on the road to international fame in the 1920s. The song began: "Got the world in a jug, got
the stopper in my hand." While Ellison images the blues artist as trapped in a glass bottle, looking out to read the world and assign value, Hunter images the world as
trapped within a jug and the blues artist as the creator or at least the ruler of that jug. "[I]f you want me," Hunter sings, "you must come under my command."
At first glance, Hunter's conception of the power of the blues artist may seem overblown, romantic, and naive. She certainly was an unlikely candidate to claim such
power. Few childhoods appear more desolate than hers. Born black, female, and frail in Memphis in 1895, Alberta Hunter was abandoned by her father before she
was old enough to remember him. Her mother, Miss Laura, supported herself and her two daughters by working as a maid in a brothel. In later life, Hunter described
her childhood as haunted by neglect from her mother and mistreatment at the hands of men, ranging from the selfishness of a grandfather who ate "all the good chicken
and [left] us the feet and the neck" (Taylor 4) to sexual molestations and abuse by various men throughout her adolescence. Relatives and friends nicknamed her "Pig,"
alleging that she was always dirty. Hunter's response to suffering was twofold. First, she said that men's abuse "just made me stay away from men" (Taylor 14).
Second, familial injustice made her "want to go to the top and stay there" (Taylor 5).
Hunter succeeded in both determinations. For the rest of her life, she resisted men's sexual advances and committed herself to lesbian friendships. She made it to the
top of the blues music industry by becoming one of the most creative blues artists of this century. As music critic Melvin Maddocks observes, "of all the blues singers,
Alberta Hunter may have been the most versatile" (23). Hunter's career as a blues performer spanned seventy years. At the age of seventeen, she ran away to
Chicago and began singing in bordellos. Before long, she had worked her way up to night clubs like the Dreamland and then began touring nationally. Like most jazz
musicians, she flourished on improvisation. Her approach to writing lyrics appeared casual; "different little things would come to me that rhymed," she explained
offhandedly (Taylor 53). She wrote songs successfully for decades, but she was more possessive about what she called her "tricks" and "style" than her lyrics.
Hunter's inimitable style had a formative impact on the development of blues music in the crucial decade of the 1920s, when she began selling her songs to other artists
as well as recording them herself. She sang throughout

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 203

the United States, Europe, and Asia in the 1930s and 1940s. When her singing career ebbed in the 1950s, she demonstrated her skill at improvisation by deciding to
become a licensed practical nurse, even though she was sixty years old and had never finished elementary school. She took equivalency examinations in 1955 in
Chicago and applied to nursing school, secretly shaving twelve years off of her age. She succeeded. After twenty­two years of devoted nursing, Hunter was forced to
retire in 1977 because the hospital personnel office thought she was seventy years old. She was actually eighty­two. Never one to give up, Hunter went to New York
to launch her second musical career. She became more popular and famous than ever before. She was particularly pleased when "her" President Jimmy Carter asked
her to sing in the White House. She sustained her second international singing career until her death in 1984, at the age of eighty­nine.
One remarkable aspect of Hunter's career is how much she endangered herself—that is, literally put her life at risk—in order to make money and to sing. At the age of
sixteen, Hunter was so physically underdeveloped that she could travel on trains on a child's pass, which is exactly what she did when she ran away from Memphis to
Chicago. Learning quickly that working as a maid or restaurant drudge would trap her permanently in poverty, Hunter decided to sing. For months she was routinely
thrown out of the brothel where she aspired to perform. She had to fight not only to claim an audience but also to avoid omnipresent pimps. Once her career was
launched, she was at risk from police raids, pickpockets, confidence men, and thugs. One night at a blues bar in Chicago, the lights went out and when they came
back on, Hunter discovered that a man sitting near her had been shot. In 1922 when Hunter went on a southern tour, "the body of a young black boy, lynched
because he supposedly talked back to a white man, was thrown into the lobby of a theatre where she was to appear" (Taylor 52).
The danger Hunter faced throughout her life was not atypical; it was part and parcel of everyday life for most African Americans. Writing and singing could be
associated with safety only in very limited, particular ways. Since its origins in the eighteenth century, African American writing has been connected primarily to
freedom and to the decolonizing of identity—processes undertaken at tremendous risk. In a historical context where literacy was outlawed, African Americans who
wrote literally endangered their lives with the same strokes whereby they claimed ownership of their lives. After formal emancipation in 1864, art continued to be a
danger­ridden activity. As James Baldwin puts it, the blues artist risks "ruin, destruction, madness, and death, in order to find new ways to make us listen" (86). In
Baldwin's formulation, the blues artist encourages his or her listeners "to leave the shoreline and strike out for the deep water" (85). Safety is invoked only in the sense
that the artist stands as "witness that deep water and drowning [are] not the same thing" (85).

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 204

African American cultural theorists widely agree that the blues infuse the heart and soul of African American culture. Houston Baker defines the blues as the matrix of
African American discourse, the fertile womb of "ceaseless input and output, a web of intersecting, crisscrossing impulses always in productive transit ... the multiplex,
enabling script in which Afro­American cultural discourse is inscribed" (3–4). Resisting unitary or binary ideological narratives, Baker argues, the blues refuse "to be
pinned down to any final, dualistic significance. Even as they speak of paralyzing absence and ineradicable desire, their instrumental rhythms suggest change,
movement, action, continuance, unlimited and unending possibility" (8). In Alberta Hunter's blues, the lyrics as well as the instrumentals often empower the singer
toward feminist self­affirmation, agency, movement, and change. For example, in "I've Got a Mind to Ramble" (written in 1949 and first recorded in New Jersey,
January 11, 1950), Hunter expresses an angry determination to leave a humiliating love affair. She describes how gossip is circulating "all over town" because the
higher she tries to raise her lover, the lower he tries ''to drag [her] down." Fed up with begging him to mend his "low­down dirty ways," she has made up her mind to
leave. In face of his disbelief that she will actually leave, she responds, "Just count the days I'm gone."
In case the no­count triflin' man didn't get the point, Hunter drives it home in multilingual play in her song "I've Had Enough" (alternately named "I'm Tired of Being
Your Football" and "Alberta's Blues"; written around 1978 and recorded in New York, July 28, 1981, when Hunter was eighty­six years old). After declaring that she
has had enough of being kicked around like a football, the singer expresses her determination to leave on the nine o'clock train. She concludes with verbal fireworks,
displaying the six languages—Italian, French, Danish, Yiddish, German, and English—that she was proud to sing in and adding a little Japanese for good measure: "If I
never, ever, see you again, brother, / Good­bye. Or, sayonara. Au revoir. See ya see ya" and so on—multilingual excess sure to intimidate many a brother. In this
song, as in many others, Hunter participates in the blues philosophy that, resisting Master Narratives, inspires energies that undermine, bypass, subvert, and exceed
patriarchal logic.
Defining the blues as mournful music about victimization is a common but uninformed mistake. Through multiple artistic media such as music, writing, and painting, the
blues articulate a hard­won affirmation of life and self. The blues artist "fill[s] the air with life," with his or her own life, which the artist understands contains the lives of
many other people as well (Baldwin 140). Through the blues, Baldwin argues, the artist and the audience lament the tragedies of their lives, but also discover "how we
could cease lamenting" (140). Freedom is imagined and expressed in the blues: the audience finds freedom through listening and the artist finds freedom when the
audience

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:37 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 205

listens, in a reciprocal movement. Blues theorists have shown that blues art must be created afresh every generation because "reaffirmation is precisely the contingency
upon which the very survival of man as human being, however normally unsatisfied and abnormally wretched, is predicated" (Murray 6).
In his influential essay on Richard Wright's autobiographical masterpiece Black Boy, Ralph Ellison defines the blues as "an impulse to keep the painful details and
episodes of a brutal experience alive in one's aching consciousness, to finger its jagged grain, and to transcend it, not by the consolation of philosophy but by squeezing
from it a near­tragic, near­comic lyricism. As a form, the blues is an autobiographical chronicle of personal catastrophe expressed lyrically" (78–79). Every piece of
this definition signally illuminates the achievement of blues artists like Richard Wright. It may also work well to describe the music of a mournful singer like Billie
Holiday. However, unlike Wright or Holiday, most African American women who have sung the blues have joined feminist politics with the transformative powers of
the blues matrix. Part of their power, I would argue, comes from their insistence on exceeding what Ellison calls "an autobiographical chronicle of personal
catastrophe." To understand why women artists empowered themselves by stepping outside of autobiography, we need to re­examine the feminist quest to tell a free
story.
Feminism and Autobiography
The history of women's writing as we know it is a history of struggle against patriarchal scripts that inscribe women in silence. In the recent wave of the feminist
movement, classic texts from Anglo­American and French feminists have continually exhorted women to claim their voices and write their stories. For example, in her
inspiring 1976 essay, "The Laugh of the Medusa," Hélène Cixous declares:
Woman must write her self: must write about women and bring women to writing, from which they have been driven away as violently as from their bodies—for the same reasons,
by the same law, with the same fatal goal. Woman must put herself into the text—as into the world and into history—by her own movement. (245)

Similarly, in 1980, in Diving Deep and Surfacing, Carol Christ called on women to write their stories because "Women's stories have not been told. ... Without
stories she cannot understand herself" (1). Responding to these and other feminist calls during the past two decades, thousands of women around the world have
gotten personal and political through writing autobiographically.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 206

What, then, did Shoshana Felman mean when she asserted in 1993 that "none of us, as women, has as yet, precisely, an autobiography" (14)?
In What Does a Woman Want? Felman cautions against what she calls "the mere stylistic trend" of "getting personal" in one's writing. She argues:
"Getting personal" does not guarantee that the story we narrate is wholly ours or that it is narrated in our own voice. ... Trained to see ourselves as objects and to be positioned as
the Other, estranged to ourselves, we have a story that by definition cannot be self­present to us, a story that, in other words, is not a story, but must become a story. (14)

Felman continues her provocative analysis by arguing that women can engender or access their stories only indirectly, through "the bond of reading, that is, through
the story of the Other (the story read by other women, the story of other women, the story of women told by others)" (14). She suggests that women need to
conjugate "literature, theory, and autobiography together through the act of reading and by reading, thus, at once our sexual difference and our autobiography as
missing" (14). Like Felman, I believe that feminists need to problematize our current, often untheorized enthusiasm for autobiography. Because our identities have been
written in and by patriarchal scripts, telling the stories of our lives is not necessarily a liberating act. We may, almost as if by instinct, compulsively repeat femininity or
rewrite ourselves as men. As Felman asks, "from where should we exorcise this male mind, if we ourselves are possessed by it?" (5). Following Felman, I would
argue that we must return to the site of possession—that is, we must read and reread the stories that have written us. Before we can write ourselves out of determined
and determining patriarchal scripts, we must teach ourselves to read differently, vigorously, and dangerously.
Although not an academic theorist, Alberta Hunter found her own ways—in a hurry and at a very young age—to read, reread, and theorize about patriarchal, white
supremacist scripts. She saw that marriage and fame were mutually exclusive for women, and she chose fame (Taylor 15). With characteristic pragmatism and a
determination to forge success in a tremendously unjust world, Hunter recognized the futility in her context of testifying to sexual abuse. As she said near the end of her
life,
People think a child is a liar. Children can scream and cry and do everything to try to impress the person of the fact that they are being mistreated, that they're not lying, and still,
they would not be believed. It's a crime. Oh, it's a crime. (Taylor 14)

Whereas Richard Wright was able to chronicle his personal catastrophes in lyrical form and to find an audience, Hunter had stories to tell that the world

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 207

was not ready to hear in her lifetime. The way she created safety for herself was not by baring her soul but by protecting her privacy:
I never shared my private life with anybody in the world, not even with my mother. I've always been a loner. The only thing that anyone knew about my private life was what they
tried to guess. But nobody ever knew. I never sat around and told stories on myself. (Taylor 30)

Although this personal privacy contradicts the narrative trajectory of late twentieth­century feminist models of healing and wholeness, Hunter created a woman­
centered private life (she sustained several sequential long­term lesbian relationships and supported her mother through old age) at the same time that she created a
rewarding artistic career. Her achievement dramatizes the non­identity—the shifting identities—of she who was written, she who reads, she who writes, and she who
sings. If Hunter had attempted to integrate her various private and public selves into one single, sexually­specific, sincere, "realistic" self, her ability to perform would
have been inhibited and her musical legacy impoverished.
A problem that undermines many feminist attempts to tell a free story and to author a free self is that women writers have often failed to free themselves imaginatively
from the phallocentric ideal of a unified self. "Integration," "authenticity," and "wholeness" have been catchwords of liberal feminist self­concepts. I argue that far from
being free, this unified self, this "I" of autobiography, tends to be constrained and contained in a patriarchal, self­indulgent solipsism. We need to author new concepts
of self that take bliss in multiplicity. The power of Emily Dickinson and Emily Brontë, for example, stems from their non­identity with the voices and personae of their
writing; they write themselves in multiple voices and figures not contained in autobiographical facts. Such, too, is the case of Alberta Hunter. She cannot be limited to a
singular voice; she imagines into existence countless voices and infinite possibilities.
Despite Hunter's remarkable accomplishment, only one book (a biography), a handful of scholarly articles, and a few documentary videos have been published
analyzing her work. The relative inattention granted to Hunter compared to a singer like Billie Holiday may stem, it seems to me, from the fact that Holiday was as
dramatic in her tragic failure as a drug and alcohol addict as she was gifted in her musical performances. In many ways, Holiday's early death serves as a warning and
punishment for transgressions, in step with the discourse repeatedly aimed at African Americans in the recent decades of the "wars on drugs" and "just say no"
reductive moralism. In contrast to Billie Holiday, Alberta Hunter's long, successful, exuberant life suggests that transgression does sometimes pay. Her transgressive
conduct does not fit stereotypes

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 208

of black behavior. Asked her secret to longevity, Hunter replied: "Lookit, honey, I never smoked, drank, cussed, took drugs, owed nobody nothin' and never did
musical exercises to warm up. All I ever did is open my mouth and sing" (Taylor 267). She took care of her voice, got plenty of rest, travelled around the world when
she felt like it, and kept a low profile except when performing. She had a reputation for being tight with money and taking care of business. She did not break rules
carelessly; she was a disciplined worker and a strong­willed rebel who did things deliberately the way she believed they ought to be done—breaking rules on principle
and for good reason.
The primary social conventions Alberta Hunter set out to break were the narrative conventions that told blacks and women how to lead their lives. After witnessing the
desperately circumscribed lives that white American society assigned to blacks and experiencing molestations as a child, Hunter was determined to create new life
stories for herself. She recalled "losing" men to other women. With the ironic twist that characterizes much of Hunter's speech and music, she lamented the way other
women took her men away: "Oh, I lost them all. Oh, Lord. God is so good. They got their marriage. And I got the fame." Having rejected the marriage plot, Hunter
then rejected idealizing images of motherhood, saying: "No, I'm glad I don't have to sit around and hold them babies. No, Lord, look at me, stepping off one plane and
getting on another, going up, up, up. But I love children. I like them, but I don't want them around me" (Taylor 15). Hunter provided a home for her mother, made
women friends the sexual centers of her life, and developed long­lasting friendships with male musicians. Most importantly, she devoted herself to living and singing
new stories. Positioning herself as a blues messiah, Hunter explained: "The story is love. A lot of people need it and want it badly but they haven't had it. ... It's a great
pleasure to be able to spread love and to be a participant in it, to be one of the messengers. I came to bring a message and I'm trying to deliver that message. I'm
waiting for you to accept it" (''Alberta Hunter" 252).
III. Performative Blues
If Alberta Hunter did not author an "autobiographical chronicle of personal catastrophe" or strive to express an authentic, integrated self, what did she achieve in her
blues performances? The safety she created for herself was the kind of safety that comes from financial stability. The freedom and power that she claimed were the
freedom and power that come from giving voice not necessarily to autobiographical "facts" but to the entire human range of emotions and selves. How good it is to
sing and dance, at the age of nineteen, at the age of eighty­three. Whereas Ellison's invisible man keeps searching for

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 209

his illusory "I/eye," Hunter shows little interest in an autobiographical "I." She desires to bring on stage a performing, performative "I'' whose very presence is the sign
of her triumph.
In July 1922 Alberta Hunter recorded the first song that she herself wrote. As mentioned above, the song was called "Down­Hearted Blues." When Bessie Smith
selected it for her first recording, it sold over a million copies, making both Bessie and the song famous. Hunter herself continued singing "Down­Hearted Blues" for
sixty years, and she said that she collected royalties on all recordings of it for the rest of her life. Hunter was twenty­seven years old in 1922 and squeezing out a
precarious living from various jobs. She was invited to New York for a recording session for the first time that summer. When she wrote "Got the world in a jug, got
the stopper in my hand," she was not reporting a pre­existing truth. The lines did not function as a description of autobiographical reality. Rather, "Down­Hearted
Blues" functioned performatively as a speech act to bring a new reality into being. In the beginning was the Word—or, as J. L. Austin puts it, "to utter the sentence (in,
of course, the appropriate circumstances) is not to describe my doing...: it is to do it" (6). By singing "got the world in a jug," Hunter put the world in her jug.
In place of the anger and vengeance that Richard Wright so forcefully expresses and in place of the Oedipal struggle to kill the Father that Ellison's invisible man enacts
and later rejects, Alberta Hunter positions herself in her music as what Roland Barthes would call an "intractable lover." Hunter described her jazz this way:
Personally, it means to do unto others as I wish to be done to at all times. It's my music, I love it. I can touch a person. I can touch different people that never paid any attention to
me before through my jazz. Yeah, touching. It's a language. Jazz has a language all its own. Naturally it's an expression of love. ("Alberta Hunter" 251)

As Barthes has shown, love (jouissance) is an anti­ideological force that cannot be manufactured, governed, managed, or directed; it tends to slip away just when one
catches on to it and to explode just when one thinks it has been contained. Love is unruly, gratuitous, excessive, and serendipitous; it is not easily manipulated,
placated, or cured. While anger and protest make one tired, love unleashes energy (Barthes 23).
Barthes observes that in love there is sometimes an "explosion of language during which the subject manages to annul the loved object under the volume of love itself:
by a specifically amorous perversion, it is love the subject loves, not the object ... it is my desire I desire, and the loved being is no more than its tool" (31). In Hunter's
music, she performs multiple fictive heterosexual postures:

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Copyright 1998. State University of New York Press.
All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses
permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.

Page 210

an abandoned lover, an insatiable lover, a vengeful lover, and so on. What becomes clear in watching her perform is that her passion is perverse precisely in the sense
that it turns away from the loved object. Her love is so excessive that, intoxicated by her own desire, she annuls the (male) lover's voice and exorcises his desire. She
desires her own desire.
Like dozens of other women who sang the blues, Alberta Hunter refused to buy into the bourgeois "goodness" that traps so many women in variations of miserably
virtuous martyrdom. In her conclusion to "I've Got a Mind to Ramble," the singer celebrates leaving an unhappy marriage and returning to a lusty, expressive self with
the sense and the will to suck the juice out of life. Hunter confides in the audience: if we see her stealing, don't tell on her because she's stealing back ''to [her] used­to­
be," her former assertive, sexual, fulfilled self, the one who can have "two men, make it three." One man is good for money, but the other man arouses her heart and
her lust. With bright eyes and a wide smile, an eighty­year­old Alberta swayed night after night in front of a dazzled audience. Wearing a red dress and gold hoop
earrings, she cackled about the beauty of her long, tall lover and licked her lips while repeating the classic blues line: "The blacker the berry, the sweeter is the juice."
Perhaps the song that best dramatizes the pleasure Hunter takes in erotic linguistic play is "My Handy Man Ain't Handy No More." This song was recorded in New
York on December 17, 1979, when Hunter was eighty­four. She begins by asserting that "whoever said a good man was hard to find / Positively absolutely sure was
blind / Cause I just found the best man that ever was." She proceeds to titillate the audience by listing "just a few of the things" her handy man does. The sexual
metaphors include: shaking her ashes, greasing her griddle, churning her butter, and stroking her fiddle. With a suggestive grin and raised eyebrows, Hunter continues
to pun on her man's handy skills while the audience laughs and claps. The handy man threads her needle, creams her wheat, heats her heater, chops her meat. Hunter
cackles that she doesn't care whether or not the audience believes her; her man is "mighty nice ... to have around / 'Cause when my furnace gets too hot—unnh— /
He's right there to turn my damper down." Improvising with a seemingly endless supply of oral and tactile sexual metaphors, Hunter continues for several more minutes
listing the man's skills at cooking, cleaning, and caretaking. The poor man works so hard and so intently that "he never has a single word to say," Hunter croons,
shaking her head. She concludes with a testament to the man's prowess: he makes sure she gets "a nice fresh piece every day." To skeptics who might doubt the
veracity of the singer's claims to have found the superman who keeps her so abundantly satisfied, I can only repeat Hunter's own assertion of her impeccable honesty:
"You know I don't lie— / Who me? Not much now."
Sixty years after writing "Downhearted Blues," Alberta Hunter still had the world in a jug; at the age of eighty­five, she was singing "Down­Hearted

EBSCO Publishing : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 3/11/2020 7:39 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES
AN: 7921 ; Kuribayashi, Tomoko, Tharp, Julie Ann.; Creating Safe Space : Violence and Women's Writing
Account: undeloan.main.ehost

Page 211

Blues" five nights a week to captivated New York audiences. She explained to reporters that although blues lyrics describe women beaten up by men, the blues are
not about love troubles or people who "just have a few worries." She continued:
Many people think a woman sings the blues only when she is in love with a man who treats her like a dog. I never had the blues about no man, never in my life, honey. If a man
beats me, I'll take a broomstick and beat him to death.
But that's not the blues. We sing the blues because our hearts have been hurt. Blues is when you're hungry and you don't have money to buy food. Or you can't pay your rent at
the end of the month. Blues is when you disappoint somebody else: if you owe some money to your best friend, and you know he needs it, but you don't have it to give him.
(Taylor 263)

As this passage indicates, Alberta Hunter's blues may be about love in a large sense, but they do not chronicle her personal suffering or describe her sexual identity.
They do not make her safe or establish an authentic, integrated self. Rather, her blues are performative acts that empower her to play with multiple selves and put
money in the bank. The jouissance she takes and gives—the bliss that makes her rich—is bliss in storytelling, bliss in creation, and bliss in the audience that responds
"Amen."
Works Cited
"Alberta Hunter." Particular Passions: Talks with Women Who Have Shaped Our Times. Eds. Lynn Gilbert and Gaylen Moore. New York: Clarkson N. Potter,
1981. 245–53.
Austin, J. L. How to Do Things with Words. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1975.
Baker, Houston A. Blues, Ideology, and Afro­American Literature: A Vernacular Theory. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1984.
Baldwin, James. "Sonny's Blues." Fiction 100: An Anthology of Short Stories. Ed. James H. Pickering. New York: MacMillan, 1988. 66–87.
Barthes, Roland. A Lover's Discourse: Fragments. Trans. Richard Howard. New York: Hill and Wang, 1978.
Carby, Hazel. "In Body and Spirit: Representing Black Women Musicians." Black Music Research Journal 11 (1991): 177–92.
Carby, Hazel. "It Jus Be's Dat Way Sometimes: The Sexual Politics of Women's Blues." Radical America 20 (1986): 9–22.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:39 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 212

Christ, Carol. Diving Deep and Surfacing: Women Writers on Spiritual Quest. Boston: Beacon Press, 1980.
Cixous, Hélène. "The Laugh of the Medusa." New French Feminisms. Eds. Elaine Marks and Isabelle de Courtivon. New York: Schocken, 1988. 245–264.
Ellison, Ralph. "Richard Wright's Blues." Shadow and Act. New York: Vintage, 1953. 77–94.
Ellison, Ralph. "The World and the Jug." Shadow and Act. 107–43.
Felman, Shoshana. What Does a Woman Want? Reading and Sexual Difference. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1993.
Maddocks, Melvin. "Alberta Hunter: The Lady Sang More than the Blues." Christian Science Monitor October 26, 1984: 23.
Murray, Albert. Stomping the Blues. New York: Da Capo, 1976.
Taylor, Frank C., and Gerald Cook. Alberta Hunter: A Celebration in Blues. New York: McGraw­Hill, 1987.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:39 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 213

" 'In the Center of My Body is a Rift': Trauma and Recovery in Joy Kogawa's Obasan and Itsuka
Julie Tharp
In her essay on Joy Kogawa's Obasan, Shirley Geok­lin Lim locates the novel within a Japanese­American literary traditon that comments on its predecessors, noting
that this complex portrayal of the mother is a direct descendant of Monica Sone's "mother text," Nisei Daughter, published in 1953 (298). Identifying her mother with
traditional Japanese culture and ethnicity and American culture with the English language, Sone finds it impossible to maintain a "double identity in a repressive, racially
homogenizing system" (299). Geok­lin Lim argues that the blending of the two cultures into one "is the repression of that part of the narrator's identity represented by
her Japanese mother. Ironically, but not intentionally so, the book ends with the lesson of one for the price of two; the mother's story of a different race is burned,
confiscated, imprisoned, and finally engulfed in the mainstream" (300). Obasan takes the repression of the mother's story as its central text. Geok­lin Lim argues that
Naomi has to learn to use the discourses not just of self­narration and its converse "recessive silence" but also the discourse of "sociopolitical fact'' in order to tell the
mother's story. The many dream sequences within the novel further develop "the closest approximation to speech from 'that amniotic deep'" that begins to tell the story
of the daughter prior to separation from her mother (308).
The discourses of "sociopolitical fact" actually take priority over self­narration and the discourses of silence in several critics' examinations of Obasan. Cheng Lok
Chua demonstrates how the novel follows a pattern of "processual structure," a theory developed by anthropologists to describe ritual migration. She connects the
three stages of separation, liminality, and aggregation to the removal, internment, and reintegration of Japanese Canadians that Kogawa describes in the novel. Donald
C. Goellnicht and Marilyn Russell Rose discuss the novel Obasan as metafictional history and Naomi as historian. Rose calls the relocation of Japanese Canadians a
"sociopathic rape" (222), and, interestingly, in 1988 predicts Aunt Emily's comments in the 1992 novel Itsuka where

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:39 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 214

Emily writes, "Over the years, the Japanese Canadian community went into hiding and became silent as rape victims" (208). In point of fact the novel Itsuka does
illustrate how only in her commitment to political action through her enforced work on Bridge magazine does Naomi begin to recover from her stone­like paralysis.
These critical essays, however, seem to dismiss too quickly the more personal components of Naomi's experience as well as dichotomize the personal and the
political. Rose, for instance, sees in Naomi's affect­less personality the ideally neutral historian.
The process described within the two novels fits as neatly with models of trauma and recovery from sexual assault as it does with processual structure. Furthermore,
the second novel, Itsuka, is difficult to reconcile in its entirety unless we consider the effects of sexual abuse on Naomi. The symptoms of Posttraumatic Stress
Disorder that Naomi exhibits on a number of occasions within the novel seem inconsistent with a reading of her trauma as one stemming only from political
disenfranchisement. For example, early in the novel a stranger, who has allegedly molested a girl behind the curling rink, pulls his car up alongside Naomi, who is
working in a beetfield. When he comes up to her with a five­dollar bill and asks her name, she turns and walks toward her uncle and brother.
It's while I'm walking toward them, and not looking backward, that the dizziness and the pain roll through me. I double over.
Uncle!
I stumble over the clods of earth, faint and retching. "Hey there, hey there," the stranger keeps blurting out.
Uncle!
I have soiled myself. I'm mortified. I'm half crawling as I change direction and head for the irrigation ditch bridge. Uncle with his bowlegged rolling gait comes running across the
field to where I lie, hiding under the bridge in the mud where the stranger can't see. I remove my underpants gingerly. Without a word, Uncle squats in the mud and the thistles,
taking the foul garment as if it were a handkerchief and swishing it in the brown ditch water.
All that afternoon, Uncle stays with me in the clamminess of the dirt cellar at the far end of the field. (Itsuka 31)

Naomi's extreme reaction to the threat of the stranger resembles nothing so much as sexual retraumatization. The soiling of the underpants further suggests a sexual
component to her trauma.
In a review essay on the relationship of childhood sexual abuse to adult Posttraumatic Stress Disorder, John B. Murray observes that "The most distinctive signs of
PTSD are re­experiencing symptoms such as intrusive memories,

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:39 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 215

avoidance of stimuli connected with the event, a numbing of general responsiveness that may involve loss of ability to have loving feelings, heightened bodily arousal,
recurrent nightmares and flashbacks" (666). The nightmares and panic attacks that Naomi experiences and her general emotional numbness throughout both novels—
she describes herself on an emotional scale as some­where between a "cactus and a chimpanzee" (Itsuka 133)—and the abdominal pain she experiences when
coming into contact with men suggest an inability to move beyond the abuse and separation she suffered as a child.
Naomi's relationships with men throughout Itsuka are characterized by panic attacks and dreadful nightmares. Her courtship with Hank is doomed from the start. In
reaction to his hand "placed lightly beside [her] shoulder" (51), Naomi spends all night in "a nightmare of snakes" (51). When he tries to kiss her, her "heart is pounding
wildly and a slightly nauseous dizziness sends [her] headlong onto the couch" (53). The first time that Father Cedric touches her in friendship, she experiences a similar
panic reaction: "The sudden nauseous pain extends from somewhere around my navel and across the abdomen. I bend double and attempt to ride the tide, my mind
reeling backward as it does in its efforts to find the source, the cause, the spark'' (Itsuka 133). Naomi is conscious of the long duration of this illness, but incapable of
diagnosing it for herself. "Who knows what the psychogenesis of an illness may be? There are so many mysteries in the past—so many unknowns and forbidden
rooms" (Itsuka 134).
She does, nonetheless, posit a psychological source for her illness. Murray also points out that studies suggest a strong connection between the "disruption of
relationships with primary caretakers" and psychiatric disorders (659). Naomi recalls that, according to Aunt Emily, she only "became sickly after Mother
disappeared" (Itsuka 134). In the very next line of the novel, Naomi connects the events through word choice: "Something vast as childhood lies hidden in the belly's
wars. There's a rage whose name has been forgotten" (Itsuka 134). On this occasion, however, she thinks in more reflective terms about the "illness" she has had all
her life, the pain she feels in her abdomen on these occasions. In Obasan, Naomi has expressly connected the feelings of safety provided by her mother with the belly.
It is this safe space that has been invaded and torn in two when she is forcibly separated first psychologically and then physically from her mother. The rage is that of
the child silenced by her abuser and of the child whose mother did not keep her safe. "Mothers' lack of support, as described in victims' reports, was often disastrous
and contributed strongly to their feelings of helplessness and isolation" (Murray 670). By the time Naomi is an adult, she has held her anger inside so long she cannot
summon rage over Canada's injustices, over the manner in which the country tore Japanese Canadians in two, separating families, relocating homes, essentially

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:39 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 216

destroying whatever familial and communal safe spaces they had created for themselves.
King­Kok Cheung provides an insightful reading of the various functions of silence within Obasan, arguing that Kogawa differentiates between various kinds of
silence, distinguishing among "protective, stoic, and attentive silence" (128). It is only through her attentive silence that Naomi (and the reader) can come to appreciate
the protective, stoic silence of the Issei and of others who endure. Kogawa, however, "reveals the strengths and limits of discursive power and quiet forbearance alike;
in doing so, she maintains the complementary functions of verbal and nonverbal expression" (Cheung 128). While Naomi is overwhelmed by Aunt Emily's spate of
words, she finds her mother and Obasan's messages of silent endurance ultimately inadequate to her needs in overcoming the oppressive circumstances of her young
life. Instead Naomi also needs a defiance, which she develops through her rage and grief over her mother's injuries. The reclamation of a family history that was not
supposed to be remembered requires this defiance. Lim writes that "the project of memory and writing is also the project of rescuing race history from 'wordlessness'
and of healing through poetic language itself the psychosocial wounds caused by the internment and dispersal of Japanese Canadian families..." (308).
A. Lynne Magnusson's psychoanalytic view of Naomi's wordlessness helps us to locate her "linguistic anxiety" in the child's separation from the mother, but
Magnusson also undermines the role of sexual abuse in Obasan, suggesting that it functions more symbolically in the woman's mind than as an actual event linked
temporally and psychologically to the mother's disappearance. While I agree that the pre­Oedipal mother/child bond is doubtless broken by either or both events,
either one of the events could also have produced the trauma evident in the character. What seems signficant is that they are linked. First, consider the mother's role in
Naomi's dilemma.
Obasan explores the problem of the mother who is first absent in the sense that she does not protect Naomi from the neighborhood molester (although Naomi does
not consciously blame her for that) and secondly the mother who is absent by choice, leaving to see her own mother and staying to hide her disfigurement. Naomi has
to deal with several issues when she learns of her mother's fate: the horror of her injuries and death and the horror of her mother's purposeful detachment. While
Kogawa's novel does not seem to blame the mother for these events, Naomi criticizes her mother's silence as ultimately harmful to both of them.
Separated from her mother as a young child, Naomi can only bear to remember a few scenes from her early childhood. Those few scenes suggest that her mother,
although Nisei, is a proper Japanese woman: "She is altogether yasashi [soft and tender]" (Obasan 51). The only text Naomi remembers her mother delivering to her
is the child's song: "How did you, Miss Daffodilly,/

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:39 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 217

Get your pretty dress?/ Is it made of gold and sunshine?/ Yes, child, yes" (51). The song reinforces a gentle, almost whimsical femininity without any political
consciousness of ethnic or national identity. Mother's favorite songs are, however, actually western ones, suggesting that she has assimilated at least partially to
Canadian culture.
Naomi does distinguish a certain gender and race consciousness through her mother's body. She identifies a certain look with her mother:
Her eyes are steady and matter of fact—the eyes of Japanese motherhood. They do not invade and betray. They are eyes that protect, shielding what is hidden most deeply in the
heart of the child. She makes safe the small stirrings underfoot and in the shadows. Physically, the sensation is not in the region of the heart, but in the belly. This that is in the
belly is honoured when it is allowed to be, without fanfare, without reproach, without words. What is there is there. (Obasan 59)

Unfortunately the mother is not able to protect her daughter from the neighbor man who molests Naomi, who dishonors "this that is in the belly," separating Naomi
from the shelter of her mother's eyes. "His hands are frightening and pleasurable. In the center of my body is a rift. In my childhood dreams, the mountain yawns apart
as the chasm spreads. My mother is on one side of the rift. I am on the other. We cannot reach each other. My legs are being sawn in half" (Obasan 65). While the
issues of childhood sexual abuse loom large in this passage, transcend cultural identity, they also function metaphorically since Naomi is seduced over to this Anglo
man's house and away from her Japanese mother's protection.
Naomi envisions herself as a "young branch attached by right of flesh and blood" to her mother's tree trunk leg. "Where she is rooted, I am rooted. If she walks, I will
walk. Her blood is whispering through my veins. The shaft of her leg is the shaft of my body and I am her thoughts" (Obasan 64). This pre­Oedipal interdependence
expresses in organic, natural terms a powerful and idyllic connection that allows the child to claim the strength of her parent as her own. It is Old Man Gower's hands
that turn Naomi into "a parasite on her [mother's] body, no longer of her mind. My arms are vines that strangle the limb to which I cling. ... I am a growth that attaches
and digs a furrow under the bark of her skin" (Obasan 64). A different kind of body knowledge, coupled with a knowledge of misused power and exploitation,
abruptly ruptures the mother/daughter intimacy.
Furthermore, Naomi is never redeemed from this seduction since she reports in the next sentence, the beginning of a new chapter, that "It is around this time that my
mother disappears" (Obasan 66). The child is left alone on one side of the rift, without even her mother's presence to serve as a stabilizing factor.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:39 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 218
I hardly dare to think, let alone ask, why she has to leave. Questions are meaningless. What matters to my five­year­old mind is not the reason that she is required to leave, but the
stillness of waiting for her to return. After a while, the stillness is so much with me that it takes the form of a shadow which grows and surrounds me like air. Time solidifies,
ossifies the waiting into molecules of stone, dark microscopic planets that swirl through the universe of my body waiting for light and the morning. (Obasan 66)

Although Naomi reports that her "five­year­old mind" is not concerned with the reasons for her mother's departure, it seems likely that a child might blame herself and
her "shameful" behavior for a parent's disappearance. All the same it is the stillness, with perhaps a measure of guilt and shame lurking behind it, the waiting and
listening, that completely preoccupy the girl. In place of her mother's happy songs and steady eyes, Naomi is left with her own stillness and Old Man Gower. "'Would
you like me to tell you a story?' he asks. ... Is this where the terror begins?" (Obasan 62), she asks. The ''terror" refers to the frequent nightmare she has of three
Asian women lying in the dirt, British soldiers standing over them. The Japanese mother/woman is suppressed in the dream as in waking life and replaced with the
dangerous presence of white men.
The lack of a story to counter Old Man Gower's, for surely a song about daffodils holds no strength against his lies, forms the basis for the child's development.
Suppressing his story, rejecting it, Naomi is left only with silence, a waiting for her mother to reclaim her with her own stories.
Comparable events take place on the international level, as the white men in the United States federal government permanently and physically separate Naomi from
her mother by bombing Hiroshima and Nagasaki, inflicting grave injuries on her mother as well as on so many others. She is also separated from her father and from
her home and community by the relocation policies that forced all Japanese Canadians into relocating to Canada's interior. Both the bombing and the relocation
partially sever Naomi and her family from their ethnic identity as surely as Old Man Gower has separated Naomi from her mother. Japan becomes the parasite on the
Issei's and Nisei's bodies, strangling them, but only because the Canadian government has deemed them parasites on the body of Canada.
Naomi does not have any knowledge of her mother's whereabouts, however, until she is well into adulthood. Her mother's story is suppressed by the entire family by
the mother's own wish. She imposes silence and Naomi's aunt, Obasan, maintains that silence. Often compared to a stone in her taciturnity, Obasan is always enduring
and self­sacrificing. She has none of the beauty, drama, mystery, or horror of the lost Mother. Instead she is plain and steady, always there in the background
anticipating family needs:

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:39 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 219

"She remains in a silent territory, defined by her serving hands" (Obasan 226). For Naomi, Obasan is Japan. Obasan espouses a philosophy of endurance, telling the
children that people "are made strong and excellent when they go through life's difficulties" (Obasan 131). Obasan teaches Naomi how not to be wagamama (selfish),
how to heed always others' needs. Aunt Emily on the other hand is Canada: articulate, learned, professional, politically active. Words stream out of Aunt Emily's
mouth and pen in an endless spate. She encourages Naomi to learn about the terrible things done to Japanese Canadians and to act on her anger.
For a model Naomi seems to choose Obasan, but not wholly out of allegiance to Japan. Rather it seems to come by default; her long silence "solidifies, ossifies the
waiting into molecules of stone" (Obasan 66). The habit of waiting emotionally paralyzes Naomi. She has no desire for a love life, no desire for family. She lives alone.
She has no political conviction. In speaking of Aunt Emily, however, she offers a comment on herself: "People who talk about their victimization make me
uncomfortable. It's as if they use their suffering as weapons or badges of some kind. From my years of teaching I know it's the children who say nothing who are in
trouble more than the ones who complain" (Obasan 34). Her discomfort derives from the threat to her silence. Her observation on the children suggests that she might
wear the silence as her own badge, at the very least as a defensive weapon against those who would pry.
In the end of Obasan, when Naomi has learned, from her grandmother's words, of her mother's fate, she thinks, "Gentle Mother, we were lost together in our silences.
Our wordlessness was our mutual destruction" (243). For Naomi, silence within this crucial relationship, the lack of a story around which to build her self, her love, her
anger, is actually destructive. She concludes that Obasan's silence, while abiding in a profound respect for other's wishes, colludes in this destruction. Aunt Emily is the
only one who has wanted to tell but was prevented from doing so by Uncle Isamu. Naomi rejects her mother's martyrdom, her desire to protect her children with lies.
The depth of that rejection is expressed clearly in a long epigraph, of which I will only quote a portion:
There is a silence that cannot speak.
There is a silence that will not speak.
Beneath the grass the speaking dreams and beneath the dreams a sensate sea. The speech that frees comes forth from that amniotic deep. To attend its voice, I can hear it say, is
to embrace its absence. But I fail the task. The word is stone.
I admit it.
I hate the stillness. I hate the stone. ...

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:39 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 220

Naomi summons forth her mother's voice from that "amniotic deep" in order to free herself from the imposed silence but also to rejoin her mother in the only way left
open to her. She concludes after learning of her mother's fate that "for a child there is no presence without flesh,"—the child she was could not heal the rift in her life
without her mother's physical presence—"But perhaps because I am no longer a child I can know your presence though you are not here" (Obasan 243). She tries to
know her mother's presence imaginatively, to heal the rift even though her mother is not physically present. In writing the novel, Joy Kogawa has constructed an
elaborate attempt to embrace the absent voice, to contain the mother in some manner useful to Naomi's construction of identity, but we learn from the epigraph that
she cannot fully "attend the voice," ''to embrace its absence" (Obasan).
Naomi solves the dilemma of embracing absence by retreating to the natural world where the novel begins. She concludes that she will only heal the rift with her
mother now in death, where "Love flows through the roots of the trees by our graves," when she literally becomes the same flesh as her mother, their bodies become
ground nourishing the trees above (Obasan 243).
This image of an underground stream of love and nourishment is first broached in chapter 1 of Obasan when Naomi recalls the annual walk she and her Uncle take on
the prairie. When Naomi asks her Uncle why they come here he cannot answer, but it is clearly significant for him. Naomi does not understand, even though she feels
herself a "part of this small forest" (3). She does note the "underground stream," however, which nourishes the wild rose bushes. She stands "for a long time watching
the contours of the coulee erode slowly into the night" (4).
In the novel's last chapter, Naomi reveals a transformed perception of this same landscape, a perception which reconciles the issues of silence and separation for her.
Father, Mother, my relatives, my ancestors, we have come to the forest tonight, to the place where the colours all meet—red and yellow and blue. We have turned and returned to
your arms as you turn to earth and form the forest floor. Tonight we picked berries with the help of your sighted hands. Tonight we read the forest braille. See how our stained
fingers have read the seasons, and how our serving hands serve you still. (Obasan 246)

Naomi needs to claim an erotic or fleshly integrity for her connection to her mother, to all the dead who are with her. The abstraction of grief cannot bear the weight of
all their absences. "My loved ones, rest in your world of stone. Around you flows the underground stream" (Obasan 246). She is able to conjure up from the stream
the concrete and fluid presence of their silence. "Between the river and Uncle's spot are the wild roses and the tiny wildflowers

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:39 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 221

that grow along the trickling stream. The perfume in the air is sweet and faint. If I hold my head a certain way, I can smell them from where I am" (Obasan 247).
Naomi affirms the living, the sensual in the midst of loss—the mind's desire is for rootedness in the body; the body's desire is to endure in the flesh. The scent of roses
here is her uncle's flesh made to live again in the rose.
The measure of the power this reconciliation has provided for Naomi lies in Kogawa's inclusion of a government document at the end of Obasan. Heretofore
seemingly indifferent to past atrocities, knowledge of her mother's fate seems initially to fuel Naomi's defiance of Canadian politics, even though at the beginning of
Itsuka we find Naomi more or less paralyzed as always. The memorandum cited there in full is an expression of the governmental struggle over the status of the
offending bodies and loyalties of Japanese­Canadian citizens. Read within the narrative of Naomi's life it takes the place of the mother's story, the mother's voice. It
more or less becomes Naomi's nursery tale, since it was foisted upon her at the same time that her mother was taken from her by the same institutional powers. Unjust
government ideologies of racial discrimination and dehumanization were the lessons she learned in childhood. It is, however, only in being reconciled with her mother,
only in knowing her mother's story that she has the strength to recognize this, to claim the damage and to begin over from that starting point.
Knowledge of this formative tale allows Naomi to break her vigil of silence, her waiting for a story that can never come. Although the narrative perspective is oriented
to discovery through the present tense, we have to assume that it is crafted by a consciousness who has already been there, who already knows the story from start to
finish. She is tracing the protagonist's movement from impotent silence (as opposed to the attentive) to a style of communication that balances the verbal and non­
verbal, although the novel Itsuka reveals this to be a long and arduous movement indeed. It is primarily because of the protectiveness of Obasan and Uncle that
Naomi does not learn her mother's story until the age of thirty­six, presumably because it is not exactly a bedtime story suitable for a young child. The story, however,
carries with it the seeds for a radical consciousness.
When Naomi's mother leaves, Naomi's world becomes static, awaiting the mother's return. The child thinks, "If my mother were back, she would move aside all the
darkness with her hands and we would be safe and at home in our home" (Obasan 69). The "darkness," she explains, is everywhere, threatening them in the streets, in
school, everywhere but home. The darkness is the threat of war, but it is also pervasive anti­Japanese sentiment that gets Stephen beaten up at school and ultimately
tears the home and family apart. In response to these threats as well as to the threat of Old Man Gower, Naomi moves within herself into a place of emotional stasis, a
move Murray maintains is common to childhood trauma survivors.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:39 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 222

Naomi's emotional retreat remains complete until the year she learns about her mother's death, described in Itsuka as the year "a certain circular spinning stops. A
cocoon disintegrates. The knowledge of death follows the knowledge of death and gnaws its way through my shell" (70). Once the shell is disintegrated, Naomi can
begin the real work of reintegrating herself, of creating a safe space, a home not just for her mind but for her feelings as well. The illness she has suffered through her
life is symptomatic of the splitting off from her body, the being sawn in half. Much later in the novel she reports, "The fact of flesh is new in my life. A simple fact, as
commonplace as pebbles on a beach. But I'm a pebble that was lost. Now I've been found. I'm held in a hand that's as warm as song" (Obasan 248). She also begins
speaking of herself on several occasions as the "body/mind," a conscious assertion of the unified self. The reintegration does not guarantee safety by any means, but, if
asserted willfully, it provides a stronger basis from which to respond to the outside world and gives her the tools she needs to build a new home.
One crucial means by which Naomi begins to heal this breach within herself is through her developing relationship with Cedric. Described initially as a priest and called
Father Cedric, later in the novel he becomes merely Cedric and the Bridge staff speculate about the growing relationship between him and Naomi. Cedric is, then, at
once safe and stimulating. The friendship grows between them, however, for a number of reasons: Cedric's conception of place, his connections to nature and to
Native philosophy through his mother, and his maternal nurturance of Naomi. Cedric, in a sense, steps in for the missing mother and provides the stories and the safety
Naomi has lacked all these years.
Cedric's concept of place exists separately from his recognition of the land as a country called Canada. He sees it as the "place of [his] great­great­
grandmother" (Itsuka 159), a Native, and derives his identity from that heritage. He conceives of the land as existing independent of national identities and this, in turn,
connects for Naomi to her uncle's sense of place, to a vision of the land as prehistoric. In Obasan it is this sense of everyone joined together through the earth and its
"underground streams" and "sensate seas" that allows her to move beyond her mother's and uncle's deaths, to take comfort in a natural reconciliation. This vision of the
place also allows Naomi to claim the land for herself. Canada had stripped her of her official right to belong, but the land has never dispossessed her. In fact, Cedric's
ancestors may have more right to it than the Canadian colonizers.
The two are thus joined through a preference for natural surroundings as opposed to the urban world. They both express an organic, even romanticized, connection to
the earth. Cedric says that he is released "from the political by the personal and primitive. His mother's gift to him was a capacity to sense sentience. The sense of the
Presence, he says, is the most primitive sense, more

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:39 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 223

precious than all the other senses" (Itsuka 160). He learned from his Métis mother that "'The animals that make no sound,' he says '—the rabbits, the deer—they feel
as much as the ones that cry out'" (Itsuka 158–159), more or less echoing Naomi's own comment about her students. Cedric's ability to listen to the silence, to honor
it and keep it safe, gives Naomi a space in which to heal herself, a space outside of the imagined, amniotic space in which she is connected to her mother. Cedric's
active listening allows her to move beyond the narrow boundaries of self.
Finally, and perhaps most signficantly, Cedric functions as a maternal figure in several ways. He, like Naomi's mother, "makes safe the small stirrings underfoot and in
the shadows" (Obasan 59). Whenever Naomi has nightmares, Cedric arrives to comfort her. When others ignore her as a cipher, he forces them to see her as a
person with intelligence and power. Naomi describes him: "He is soothing as friendship. He cradles me as a mother holds her child, with care and confidence. He is as
gentle as the smallest waves from the sea where the rainbow is moored and he does not, he does not invade" (Itsuka 298). Whether the reference to invasion be
sexual or merely emotional, the safety Cedric provides gives Naomi the space in which to wrestle with her lifelong illness. They are creating a home for themselves built
out of mutual trust.
At the same time that this personal relationship has been developing, however, so too has the professional one as they both work on the redress efforts. Naomi's initial
reluctance and indifference to issues of redress increasingly develop into a deeply held commitment to the cause. At the end of the novel, when Canada finally agrees
to the apology and financial settlement, Naomi realizes a final reintegration: "I laugh. I am whole. I am as complete as when I was a very young child" (Itsuka 328).
Judith Herman emphasizes the need for the survivor of sexual abuse to reconnect with a community in order to heal. Healing both of the internal rift and the
intranational one restores Naomi to her whole self, I would argue in part because the internal body/mind rift is complicated by the body's victimization on two fronts:
sexual and racial.
In trying to convince Stephen to use his high public profile to help the redress cause, Aunt Emily argues that Japanese Canadians "will never be at home, in this country
or anywhere, unless [they] first achieve redress. ... What heals people is the transforming power of mutuality. Mutual vulnerability. Mutual strength" (Itsuka 220).
What Naomi slowly learns within the course of the novel is that mutuality—between family members, political activists, friends—creates the trust needed for a healing
home, for safety in the belly. Without that mutuality neither the failures nor the triumphs have meaning; life itself has little meaning.
In placing the childhood sexual abuse and separation from the mother at the center of Naomi's illness, Kogawa invites connections between sexual and

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:39 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 224

nationalist assaults. Kogawa does not explicitly delineate a vision of Canada and the United States as raping Japan; she's more subtle. In Emily Kato's observation that
Isseis and Niseis have behaved like rape victims in their silence, the question begs answering: in what other respects does this trauma and recovery resemble that of
rape victims? She answers this question through careful reflection on Naomi's slow and painful reintegration of her self in mind and body, as a Canadian woman of
Japanese heritage. Kogawa's meditations on the loss of and struggles to reclaim connection to the mother reverberate with the longing for a home that will make safe
"this that is in the belly."
Although it takes two complete novels to create this safe space, Kogawa accomplishes it through a variety of narrative strategies ranging from intensely personal,
poetic passages to political discourse. The fragmentation of styles in the first novel eventually merges into one more wholistic narrative by the end of Itsuka. This
merging reflects Naomi's healing, which can only take place as she learns to construct a narrative for herself—a new bedtime story—that will hold her with as much
care and tenderness as her mother did, but with the political shrewdness that Cedric possesses. The voice Naomi develops is one that transcends national boundaries
in its Japanese respect for silence and Canadian recognition of the power of discourse. It also synthesizes the logical and emotional, the personal and political. The
novels illustrate particularly well that the opposition of the private language and silence of trauma survivors to the official language of government documents is a
division full of danger for those who cannot learn to use the whole gamut of expression in order to craft a language that recognizes the whole person within the larger
community.
Works Cited
Cheung, King­Kok. Articulate Silences: Hisaye Yamamoto, Maxine Hong Kongston, Joy Kogawa. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1993.
Chua, Cheng Lok. "Witnessing the Japanese Canadian Experience in World War II: Processual Structure, Symbolism, and Irony in Joy Kogawa's Obasan." Reading
Asian American Literature. Eds. Shirley Geok­lin Lim and Amy Ling. Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1992. 97–108.
Goellnicht, Donald C. "Minority History as Metafiction: Joy Kogawa's Obasan." Tulsa Studies in Women's Literature 8.2 (Fall 1989): 287–306.
Herman, Judith. Trauma and Recovery: The Aftermath of Violence—From Domestic Abuse to Political Terror. New York: Basic Books, 1992.
Kogawa, Joy. Obasan. Boston: David R. Godine, 1981.
Kogawa, Joy. Itsuka. New York: Anchor/Doubleday, 1992.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:39 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 225

Lim, Shirley Geok­lin. "Japanese American Women's Life Stories: Maternality in Monica Sone's Nisei Daughter and Joy Kogawa's Obasan." Feminist Studies
16.2 (Summer 1990): 289–312.
Magnusson, A. Lynne. "Language and Longing in Joy Kogawa's Obasan." Canadian Literature 116 (Spring 1988): 58–66.
Murray, John B. "Relationship of Childhood Sexual Abuse to Borderline Personality Disorder, Posttraumatic Stress Disorder, and Multiple Personality Disorder." The
Journal of Psychology 127.6 (November 1993): 657–676.
Rose, Marilyn Russell. "Politics into Art: Kogawa's Obasan and the Rhetoric of Fiction." Mosaic: A Journal for the Interdisciplinary Study of Literature 21.3
(1988): 215–26.
Wong, Sau­lin Cynthia. Reading Asian American Literature: From Necessity to Extravagance. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1993.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:39 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 227

CONTRIBUTORS
Sonia Colette Apgar has an interdisciplinary background and research interests in composition and rhetoric, English and American language and literature, gender
studies, autobiographical narrative, spiritual studies, and psychoanalytic theory—especially that which studies the body/mind connection. She writes and teaches
English, composition, and writing courses at Highline Community College in Des Monies, Washington.
Susan Anne Carlson graduated from Ohio State University in 1991, with a Ph.D. in English Literature, and spent a year as a Fulbright Lecturer Eskishehir, Turkey.
She is an Assistant Professor of English at Pittsburg State University, Pittsburg, Kansas. Her current research interest is the Brontës, specifically, the juvenilia of
Charlotte Brontë. She is writing a book manuscript on the link between Charlotte Brontë's juvenilia and her four novels.
Brenda Daly, Associate Professor of English and Women's Studies, Iowa State University, teaches courses in contemporary women's literature and English teaching
methodology. She co­edited the collection, Narrating Mothers: Theorizing Maternal Subjectivities (1991), and her recently completed book, Dialogic
Daughters in the Fiction of Joyce Carol Oates, is now under review. Daly has also published a number of autobiographical essays, as well as articles on
contemporary novels by Ann Beattie, Carolivia Herron, Sue Miller, Joyce Carol Oates, Jane Smiley, and Alice Walker. At present she is at work on two books:
Incest Narratives in Twentieth­Century America and Authoring a Life, an autobiographical­theoretical analysis of her language arts education.
Mary Jo Dondlinger is an M.A. student in Interdisciplinary Humanities at Arizona State University, emphasizing twentieth­century American literature and culture
and contemporary feminist theories. This essay was originally a part of her undergraduate honor's thesis.
Linda K. Karell is currently an Assistant Professor at Montana State University in Bozeman, Montana. She received her doctorate from the University of Rochester
in 1994 and her dissertation is titled Literary Borderlands

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:39 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 228

and Unsettling Stories: Storytelling and Authority in Willa Cather, Mary Austin, Mourning Dove, and Zora Neale Hurston. Her article, "Lost Borders and
Blurred Boundaries: Mary Austin as Storyteller," is forthcoming.
Tomoko Kuribayashi is an Assistant Professor at Trinity College of Vermont, where she teaches American and Canadian literature and Women's Studies. She
specializes in contemporary women writers from Great Britain, Canada, and the United States, and has published creative writing.
Lisa Logan, Assistant Professor of English at University of Central Florida, is working on a manuscript exploring the connections among captivity, domesticity, and
subjectivity in early American women's popular narrative.
Annalee Newitz is a Ph.D. candidate in English at the University of California at Berkeley. Her dissertation is on monsters, psychopaths, and economic class in
American literature and popular culture. She is currently coediting an anthology, with Matthew Wray, called White Trash: Race and Class in America, forthcoming
from Routledge Press.
Diana L. Swanson is an Assistant Professor of Women's Studies and English at Northern Illinois University. Her articles have appeared in Women's Studies
Quarterly; Twentieth Century Literature; and Sexual Practice/Textual Theory: Lesbian Cultural Criticism, edited by Julia Penelope and Susan Wolfe.
Mary Sylwester, a doctoral candidate at the University of Iowa, is completing a book­length study of women's nineteenth­century migration narratives. In the spirit
of those migratory mothers, she will be moving her family to the Washington D.C. area.
Julie Tharp is an Assistant Professor of English at the University of Wisconsin Center in Marshfield. She has published essays on Louise Erdrich and Helena Maria
Viramontes, among others on literature and literary criticism by women of color. A forthcoming article, "When the Body Is Your Own: Feminist Film Criticism and the
Horror Genre," focuses on women and film violence.
Kari J. Winter is the author of Subjects of Slavery, Agents of Change: Women and Power in Gothic Novels and Slave Narratives, 1790–1865 as well as
numerous articles on African American culture, gothic fiction, and autobiography. She is an Assistant Professor of English at the University of Vermont.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:39 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 229

Susan L. Woods, at the time of this writing, was a graduate student in English at Iowa State University. She has published a bio­bibliography on Sue Miller for The
Dictionary of Literary Biography. At present, Woods writes for a major insurance company, still traveling the boundaries between creativity and traditionally
technical fields.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:39 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 231

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY
Ackley, Katherine Anne, ed. Women and Violence in Literature: An Essay Collection. New York: Garland, 1990.
Alcoff, Linda, and Laura Gray. "Survivor Discourse: Transgression or Recuperation." Signs 18.2 (Winter 1993): 260­290.
Barnett, Ola W., and Alyce D. LaViolette. It Could Happen to Anyone: Why Battered Women Stay. Newbury, CA: Sage Publications, 1993.
Bart, Pauline, and Eileen Geil Moran. Violence Against Women: The Bloody Footprints. Newbury Park, CA: Sage Press, 1993.
Bass, Ellen, and Laura Davis. The Courage to Heal: A Guide to Women Survivors of Child Sexual Abuse. New York: Harper and Row, 1988.
Bass, Ellen, and Laura Davis, eds. I Never Told Anyone. New York: HarperCollins Publishers, 1983.
Bell, Vikki. Interrogating Incest: Feminism, Foucault and the Law. New York: Routledge, 1993.
Benjamin, Jessica. The Bonds of Love: Psychoanalysis, Feminism and the Problem of Domination. New York: Pantheon, 1988.
Buchwald, Emilie, Pamela Fletcher, and Martha Roth, eds. Transforming a Rape Culture. Minneapolis, MN: Milkweed Editions, 1993.
Chancer, Lynn. Sadomasochism in Everyday Life: The Dynamics of Power and Powerlessness. New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press, 1992.
DeSalvo, Louise. Virginia Woolf: The Impact of Childhood Sexual Abuse on Her Life and Work. Boston: Beacon Press, 1989.
Herman, Judith. Trauma and Recovery: The Aftermath of Violence­­ From Domestic Abuse to Political Terror. New York: Basic Books, 1992.
Hischhorn, Norbert. "A Bandaged Secret: Emily Dickinson and Incest." Journal of Psychohistory 18.3 (Winter 1991): 251­281.
Jones, Ann. Next Time She'll Be Dead: Battering and How to Stop It. Boston: Beacon Press, 1994.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:39 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 232

Maracek, Mary. Breaking Free from Partner Abuse: Voices of Battered Women Caught in the Cycle of Domestic Violence. Buena Park, CA: Morning Glory
Press, 1993.
Miller, Nancy. Getting Personal: Feminist Occasions and Other Autobiographical Acts. New York: Routledge, 1991.
Moraga, Cherrìe. Loving in the War Years. Boston: South End Press, 1983.
McNaron, Toni A. H., and Yarrow Morgan, eds. Voices in the Night: Women Speaking About Incest. Pittsburgh and San Francisco: Cleis Press, 1982.
Russell, Diana E. H. The Secret Trauma: Incest in the Lives of Girls and Women. New York: Basic Books, 1986.
Terr, Lenore. Unchained Memories: True Stories of Traumatic Memories, Lost and Found. New York: Basic Books, 1994.
Ward, Audrey. Gender and Domination: The Problem of Patriarchal Power in the Narratives of Alice Walker, Alice Munro, Gloria Naylor, and Toni
Morrison. Ownings Mills, MD: Watermark Press, 1990.
Yaeger, Patricia. Honey­Mad Women: Emancipatory Strategies in Women's Writing. New York: Columbia University Press, 1988.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:39 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 233

AUTHOR INDEX
Entries in boldface type also appear in the subject index.
A
Abbott, Brian, 22
Addams, Jane, 38
Alcoff, Linda, 15, 86
confessional mode, 85, 94
survivor speech, 85
television talk shows, 24n. 2
Alexander, Christine, 61, 62, 63, 74
Antrobus, Judith S., 25n. 3
Anzaldua, Gloria, 165­166, 171, 174, 175, 176n. 2
Atwood, Margaret, 16
Auchincloss, Louis, 33, 39, 41
Auerbach, Nina, 175
Austen, Jane, 64
Austin, J.L., 209
B
Baker, Houston, 204
Bakhtin, Mikhail, 20, 43n. 3
carnivalesque, 44n. 4
The Dialogic Imagination, 29
language and feminist theory, 30
Baldwin, James, 203, 204
Barnett, Ola W., 2
Barthes, Roland, 209
Barrett (Browning), Elizabeth, 4
Bass, Ellen 3, 4, 43n. 2; 87
The Courage to Heal, 44n. 7, 96n. 3
I Never Told Anyone, 1
Baym, Nina, 16
Beecher, Catharine, 131­132
Belenky, Mary Field, 51
Bell, Clive, 87
Bell, Quentin, 86, 96n. 5
Bell, Vanessa (Stephen), 82, 86, 96n. 4
Bell, Vikki, 3
Benjamin, Jessica, 34, 36, 38, 197, 198n. 1
The Bonds of Love, 30, 34, 43n. 3
Bianchi, Martha Dickinson, 101, 115n. 1
Bingham, Millicent Todd, 101
Bloom, Lynne Z., 14
Brodkey, Linda, 83
Bronte, Branwell, 62, 63
Bronte, Charlotte, 61­77
Bronte, Emily, 61, 207
Brown, Lyn Mikel, 16
Buchwald, Emilie, 2
Butler, Judith, 192
Butor, Michel, 133
C
Caignon, Denise, 55, 57
Carby, Hazel, 201
Carlin, Deborah, 149
Cather, Willa, 147­162
Chancer, Lynn, 197
Cheung King­Kok, 216
Child, Lydia Maria, 131
Chodorow, Nancy, 27
Christ, Carol, 205
Chua, Cheng Lok, 213
Cisneros, Sandra, 165­177
Cixous, Helene, 205
Clinchy, Blythe McVicker, 51
Clover, Carol, 192
D
Dalke, Anne, 119­120
Davis, Laura, 43n. 2, 44n. 7, 87, 96n. 3
DeSalvo, Louise, 47, 83, 84, 87, 89, 93, 96n. 5
Dickinson, Austin, 106
Dickinson, Edward, 102, 103, 104, 105­106
Dickinson, Emily, 5, 101­116, 207
Dickinson, Emily Norcross, 102­103
Dickinson, Lavinia, 106
Dinnerstein, Dorothy, 27
Duckworth, George, 82, 83, 86­87, 88, 90, 91, 92, 94, 96n. 4

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:39 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 234

Duckworth, Gerald, 81, 94
Dworkin, Andrea, 192
E
Ehrenreich, Barbara, 97n. 6
Elbow, Peter, 17
Ellison, Ralph, 201­202, 205, 208­209
Erlich, Gloria, 38­39, 41, 44n. 5
F
Felman, Shoshana, 206
Fern, Fanny, 132
Fetterley, Judith, 123­124, 128n. 2
Finke, Laurie, 16
Finkelhor, David, 102, 103
Fisher, Phillip, 117, 118, 126
Fletcher, Pamela, 2
Fonda, Gudrun, 52
Foucault, Michel, 85
Freedman, Diane, 14, 15, 20
Freud, Sigmund, 12, 23, 34, 65, 70, 87, 198n. 3
Fry, Anthony, 111­112
Frye, Joanne S., 14, 96n. 1
Fryer, Judith, 153, 154
G
Gallop, Jane, 14
Garner, Shirley Nelson, 11
Gerin, Winifred, 62, 63
Gilbert, Sandra, 4, 73
Gilbert, Susan, 104, 105, 115n. 3
Gilligan, Carol, 16
Gilman, Charlotte Perkins, 97n. 6
Goellnicht, Donald C., 213
Goldberger, Nancy Rule, 51
Gordon, Lyndall, 86, 96n. 5
Gray, Laura, 15, 86
confessional mode, 85, 94
survivor speech, 85
television talk shows, 24n. 2
Green, Gayle, 14
Griffin, Susan, 14
Groves, Gail, 55, 57
Gubar, Susan, 4, 73
H
Halbeisen, Elizabeth K., 128n. 4
Hale, Sarah Josepha, 132­133
Hamborg, Isabelle McClung, 159
Hawthorne, Nathaniel, 124
Herman, Judith Lewis, 5, 23, 47, 48, 50, 93, 185, 223
Father­Daughter Incest, 96n. 3
reconstructing the life/incest story, 51­54, 87
Trauma and Recovery, 1, 80, 96n. 3, 183
Hirsch, Marianne, 27, 33, 44n. 8
Hirschman, Lisa, 96n. 3
Holiday, Billie, 205, 207
hooks, bell, 14, 20, 117
confessional discourse, 15
Hunter, Alberta, 201­212
I
Irigaray, Luce, 6
J
Jameson, Fredric, 180­181
Jones, Ann, 2, 3, 7
Joslin, Katherine, 33, 35
K
Kato, Emily, 224
Ketcham, Rebecca, 131­145
Kogawa, Joy, 163, 213­225
L
Landon, Letitia, 67
LaViolette, Alyce D., 2
Lerner, Harriet, 25n. 3
Lewis, Edith, 159
Lim, Shirley Geok­lin, 213, 216
Linde, Charlotte, 48­49, 50
Love, Patricia, 96n. 3
Lugones, Maria, 171, 173, 174­175
M
Madonna, 198n. 1
Magnusson, A. Lynne, 216
Marcus, Stephen, 68
Martin, Biddy, 118, 119, 120, 147­148, 153, 156
McNaron, Toni, 11, 84, 94
Voices in the Night, 1, 3, 4­5, 48, 51, 96n. 3
Mellor, Anne K., 124
Miller, Alice, 96n. 3
Miller, Nancy K., 14, 30, 161n. 3
Modleski, Tania, 180, 183
Moers, Ellen, 4
Moffett, James, 18
Mohanty, Chandra Talpade, 118, 119, 120, 147­148, 153, 156
Moraga, Cherrie, 167
Morgan, Yarrow, 1, 3, 4­5, 48, 51, 96n. 3
Morrison, Toni, 117, 118, 122­123, 125
Mossberg, Barbara Antonina Clarke, 103
Murray, John B., 214­215, 221
O
Oates, Joyce Carol, 12, 16
O'Brien, Sharon, 14, 158, 159
P
Paglia, Camille, 198n. 1
Patai, Daphne, 16

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:39 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 235

Pendergrast, Mark, 7
Pratt, Minnie Bruce, 147, 148
R
Radcliffe, Anne, 64, 72
Rampling, Anne. See Rice, Anne
Raphael, Lev, 33
Ratchford, Fannie, 62
Rice, Anne, 179­199 (pseuds. Anne Rampling and A.N. Roquelaure, 180)
Rich, Adrienne, 14, 43n. 1
Rivera, Geraldo, 24n. 2
Romana, Holly, 22­23
Roquelaure, A.N. See Rice, Anne
Rose, Marilyn Russell, 213­214
Rose, Phyllis, 160n. 3
Rosowski, Susan, 148
Roth, Martha, 2
Rowlandson, Mary, 118, 119, 120, 121, 124, 125
Rush, Florence, 96n. 3
Russell, Diana E.H., 96n. 3
Russo, Mary, 156
S
Sadoff, Diane, 61
Sand, George, 4
Schlafly, Phyllis, 18
Schlissel, Lillian, 134, 144n. 5
Sewall, Richard, 101, 106, 115n. 1
Showalter, Elaine, 4
Sigourney, Lydia, 131
Smith, Bessie, 202, 209
Sone, Monica, 213
Spencer, Jane, 73
Spofford, Harriet Prescott, 117­129
Sprengnether, Madelon, 11
Stael, Anne­Louise­Germaine Necker, Madame de, 74
Stephen, Julia, 82
Stephen, Sir Leslie, 82
Stern, Daniel, 49
Stoller, Robert, 190
Stowe, Harriet Beecher, 4
T
Tarule, Jill Mattuck, 51
Tennant, Steven, 160­161n. 3
Terr, Lenore, 22
Thornton, Louise, 1, 4, 5
Tintner, Adeline R., 44n. 5
Todd, Mabel Loomis, 101, 106, 115n. 1
Tompkins, Jane, 14, 28, 30
W
Walker, Mary, 134
Warner, Susan, 131
Weedon, Chris, 170, 173
Wexler, Richard, 7
Wharton, Edith, 27­46
Winfrey, Oprah, 24n. 2
Wolff, Cynthia Griffin, 33, 37, 44n. 5
Wollstonecraft, Mary, 64, 76
Woodress, James, 159
Woods, Susan L., 19­21
Woolf, Virginia, 59, 79­99, 171­172
Wright, Richard, 205, 206, 209
Y
Yaeger, Patricia, 171
Yapko, Michael D., 7
Yarbro­Bejarano, Yvonne, 172­173, 175

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:39 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 237

SUBJECT INDEX
A
African Americans, 122­123, 202, 203
See also Hunter, Alberta
Angel in the House, 82, 83
Asian women, 56.
See also Kogawa, Joy
autobiographical writing: and academic credibility, 16, 19­20
classroom assignment of, 15, 17­19, 24
and pedagogy, 16­17
risks of, 20, 23, 24n. 1
autobiography: and academic writing, 11­14, 22, 30
and blues music, 205
and feminism, 205­208
and theory, 14­15
B
backlash, 22­23
battered women, 2
bilingualism: in The House on Mango Street, 165, 169­171, 173, 176
blues music, 201­205, 208­211
body, the: 6, 163, 168­169
and landscape, 66­67
Brontë, Charlotte, 61­77
abandoned children in the works of, 66
Angria stories and juvenilia, 61­68, 73, 76
Ashworth, 68
Byronic hero in the works of, 73, 74
Captain Henry Hastings, 75
Caroline Vernon, 68, 69, 70­71
incest theme in the works of, 61, 65, 69, 72
Jane Eyre, 61, 65, 69, 75, 76
Julia, 69­70
masochism theme in the works of, 61, 65­66, 73, 75, 76
mother­daughter rivalry in the works of, 71­72
The Professor, 68
Shirley, 75
Villette, 61, 75
C
captivity narrative, 118­119, 123­125
See also Spofford, Harriet Prescott
Cather, Willa, 147­162
and cross­dressing, 156
Death Comes for the Archbishop, 149, 156
and lesbianism, 159
My Antonia, 149
''On Shadows on the Rock," 150­151
O Pioneers!, 149
The Professor's House, 156
Shadows on the Rock, 148­160
Chicanas, 165, 166, 172, 176
in literature, 169
See also Cisneros, Sandra
Cisneros, Sandra: The House on Mango Street, 165­177
"Mango Says Goodbye Sometimes," 173
"Red Clowns," 168
"Those Who Don't," 171
coding. See strategies of survivors
coming of age story, 173
community, role in recovery process, 51, 95, 223
confessional mode, 15­16, 25n. 3
in works of Virginia Woolf, 85­86, 88, 91, 94
Courage to Heal, The, 52
D
dialogism, 29, 36, 43n. 1
diaries, 59
of pioneer women, 131, 133­143
Dickinson, Emily, 101­116
family of, 102­104, 105­106, 108, 114, 115n. 3
first person pronoun in the works of, 105, 115n. 5
and the concept of home, 111, 112
and incest, 101­103, 108­111, 114
"One need not be a chamber to be haunted," 113­114
"Rearrange a wife's affection," 110­111
sexual imagery in the works of, 108­111
and the concept of space, 111­114
the "wife" poems, 103­111
discourse: academic, 17
feminist, 9
See also confessional mode
distancing. See strategies of survivors
domestic violence: frequency of, 2
and romantic love, 3
and silence, 59
domesticity, rhetoric of, 131­132
F
false memory syndrome, 7, 22
family: patriarchal, 86
Victorian, 82
fantasy, role in recovery process, 183
father­daughter seduction, theme of. See incest

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:39 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 238

feminism: and autobiography, 205­208
and blues music, 201­207
and community, 24
liberal, 207
and theory, 7, 14­16
G
gothic romance, conventions of, 72
H
home, concept of, 5, 111­112, 118, 120, 143, 147­149
Her Wits About Her, 55
historical fiction, 117
house, as metaphor, 65­66
Hunter, Alberta, 201­212
and feminism, 204
and lesbianism, 6, 202, 207
I
incest: 3, 43n. 2
stories of survivors, 22, 47­57, 70, 87
motif in literature, 30, 31, 36, 41, 44n. 5, 61, 68, 72, 103, 187
I Never Told Anyone, 52
Intimate Critique, The, 19
J
Japanese Canadians. See Kogawa, Joy
jazz, 209
See also Hunter, Alberta
journaling, 5, 6, 134
See also diaries
jouissance, 209
K
Ketcham, Rebecca, 131­145
Kogawa, Joy, 213­225
Itsuka, 213­214, 221, 222
Obasan, 213, 215­222
L
language, in The House on Mango Street, 169­170
monologic, 35
theory of, 29
language arts curricula, women writers in, 13­14
M
materialism, 167
mentoring, 20­21, 23­24
mestiza, 171
Ms., 6
multivocality, 207
N
narrative, role in recovery process, 14, 47­52, 54­57, 163
numbing. See strategies of survivors
O
Other, concept of: in autobiography, 206
in captivity narrative, 119
as female, 125
racialized, 123, 125
in Romanticism, 124
outcasts, 175­176
P
pioneer women, 131­145
Playing in the Dark, 122
pornography, in the works of Anne Rice, 192
of the Victorian period, 67­68, 69
posttraumatic stress disorder, 183, 185
in the works of Joy Kogawa, 214­215
Virginia Woolf and, 96n. 6
public space, 168­169
publishing, 6
R
race, discourse of, 119, 123
rape: fantasies of, 180­181
and revenge narratives, 192
rape culture, 2­3
reading, importance of, 13
recovery process, 48, 80, 94
stages of, 51­57
See also narrative, role in
religious space, in the works of Willa Cather, 149, 153, 154­155
rest cure, 97n. 6
Rice, Anne, 179­199
Belinda, 189, 193­194, 196
child abuse theme in the works of, 180­182, 188­189, 194­195
Cry to Heaven, 189, 192­193
Exit to Eden, 189­190, 191, 196­197
Feast of All Saints, 197, 198n. 2
incest theme in the works of, 182­184
Interview with the Vampire, 179, 181, 183­184, 188, 194­195
Lasher, 187­188
pornography in the works of, 189­192
Queen of the Damned, 184, 186, 195
sadomasochism in the works of, 189­191, 197
sexual fantasy in the works of, 183, 189, 198
Sleeping Beauty trilogy, 189, 190, 191
social class in the works of, 190, 194, 196­197
The Tale of the Body Thief, 197
Taltos, 187­188, 196
The Vampire Chronicles, 181­185, 188, 189, 194­195, 197
The Vampire Lestat, 181, 182, 188
The Witch Cycle, 185­189, 195­196
The Witching Hour, 186­188
Romana, Holly, case of, 22­23
romance, genre, 73
romanticism, American, 119, 122
S
sadomasochism: definition, 190, 198n. 1
in novels of Anne Rice, 189­191, 197
and social class, 190­191, 197
self­defense, 54­56
self­disclosure, risks of, 5, 12, 15, 79­80
See also confessional mode
sexual abuse, 3, 80, 102
See also incest

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:39 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 239

silence, 85, 88, 216, 218­219, 223
slave narratives, 59
splitting. See strategies of survivors
Spofford, Harriet Prescott, 117­129
"Circumstance," 118, 119­122, 123, 124, 125, 127, 128
"The Godmothers," 125, 126­128
racism in the works of, 123, 128n. 2
storytelling, 148, 158
strategies of survivors: in works of Virginia Woolf, 83­84, 89, 90, 91
survivor speech, 85­86
See also confessional mode
survivors of sexual abuse, 47­57, 83
T
television, talk shows, 14, 15, 24n. 2
testimony, 54, 85
See also confessional mode
theory, feminist, 7, 14­16
Transforming a Rape Culture, 2
trauma story, 1, 54.
See also recovery process; narrative, role in recovery process; survivor speech
travel, 174, 175
V
voice, separation of, 29
W
Wharton, Edith: 27­46
"Beatrice Palmato," 36­37, 42
incest theme in the works of, 31, 36­39, 41­42
"Life and I," 39
The Mother's Recompense, 27­28, 29­30, 31, 32­33, 41
spatial metaphor in the works of, 27, 29, 34, 36
"Unpublished Fragment," 37, 42
women of color, 163, 165­166, 174
See also Cisneros, Sandra; Hunter, Alberta; Kogawa, Joy
women's movement, 23­24
in Britain, 87
Woolf, Virginia: 79­99
confessional mode in the works of, 86, 94, 95
function of writing for, 80­81, 95­96
incest experience of, 79, 86­88, 96n. 2, 96n. 4
memoirs, 81, 82, 88, 94
and mental illness, 86, 92, 96n. 4­6
Moments of Being, 93
Mrs. Dalloway, 93
"Old Bloomsbury," 92
"Professions for Women," 83
publication anxiety of, 79, 84, 89
"Reminiscences," 81, 87­88, 91
"A Sketch of the Past," 80­81, 93­94
survivor strategies in the works of, 83, 85, 87, 89, 90­91, 95
"Terrible Tragedy in a Duckpond, by One of the Drowned," 87
Three Guineas, 94
To the Lighthouse, 93
"22 Hyde Park Gate," 81, 91
The Voyage Out, 80, 87, 88­90, 95
The Years, 93
writing, women's: history of, 3­4, 6
role in the recovery process: 1, 48­51, 80­95, 101, 216
strategies, 91
See also autobiographical writing; narrative, role in recovery process
EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:39 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Copyright 1998. State University of New York Press.
All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses
permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.

Page 105
4

affection for her girlfriends that she leaves no room in them for the anticipation of a future husband. Nor does she seem to aspire to wifehood in the poems; she
seems to ridicule and scorn it. She calls it a "soft Eclipse" (199, line 6); it is something that blots you out, makes you fade, grow dark and become dim. To get married
is to be "Born—Bridalled—Shrouded—/In a Day—" (1072, line 10). That is to say that you are "Born" into a new identity, "Bridalled" like a horse under the will and
control of its rider, and ''Shrouded" like a corpse, all in a single day. Her view of marriage is not a positive one. If these are truly her perceptions toward marriage, it is
ludicrous to believe that she is fantasizing about being a wife. If such were the case, the poems would celebrate the virtues and benefits of marriage, not take such an
ironic tone.
Another possibility is that the attitudes and experiences of the "wife" in the poems refers to those she gleaned from other marriages. She observed the marriage of her
parents and could comment on marriage based on these observations. Since she was such a close friend and confidante to her sister­in­law, Susan, it is probable that
she would have held intimate discourse with her upon the subject of marriage. The wife in poem 732 could plausibly have been either her mother or sister­in­law.
However, it seems inconceivable that the "wife" in the other five poems could possibly be anyone but Dickinson. Every one of these poems are in the first person
singular. In many instances, the first person "I" is metrically placed as the stressed syllable of the iamb, emphasizing this first person perspective. In poem 199, "I'm
"wife"—I've finished that—" (line 1), "I'm Czar—I'm 'woman' now—" (line 3), "I think" (line 7) all refer to first person I's, which are emphatically stressed by the
meter. The same is true in poem 463 in the first two lines "I live with Him—I see His face/I go no more away." This is repeated in lines 9 and 10, "I live with Him—I
hear His Voice—/I stand alive—Today." The emphasis placed on this perspective seems to decree that the "wife" can refer to none other than the writer, herself.5
Only in poem 732, which is written from the third person singular feminine point of view, does it seem credible that the "wife" be interpreted as someone else.
The final possibility regarding Dickinson's application of the term wife is as a metaphor for a similar relationship in Dickinson's life. Dickinson had close relationships
with a handful of men, Edward and Austin Dickinson, Samuel Bowles, Thomas Wentworth Higginson, and Charles Wadsworth, to name a few. Many of them,
however, do not bear enough similarity to a marriage relationship to be the metaphorical referent to these poems. Her relationships with Bowles, Higginson, and
Wadsworth, for example, did not involve cohabitation, social distinction, or patriarchal control.
Her relationships with both her father and brother, on the other hand, do have some parallels to a marriage­like relation. They both meet the criterion of cohabitation,
since she lived with them most of her life. As such, her

EBSCO Publishing : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES
AN: 7921 ; Kuribayashi, Tomoko, Tharp, Julie Ann.; Creating Safe Space : Violence and Women's Writing
Account: undeloan.main.ehost

Page 106

relationship with either of them bears that specific similarity to a married relationship. The characteristic of patriarchal control indicates a stronger connection with her
father than with her brother. Austin did become her patriarch after Edward's death, but Emily was already forty­four. Up to this point and after, their relationship was
close and fraternal. Although Sewall likes to downplay assertions made by Lavinia Dickinson and Mabel Todd that Edward Dickinson was tyrannical, he does
maintain that Edward was the patriarch. Emily, herself, remarks in a letter to Austin, "What father says, he means" (Letters, Johnson Letter 82). He was the person in
control and was not to be defied or refuted. Thus, since her relationship with her father bears this similarity to the married relationship as well, if she is referring
metaphorically to some real relationship with a man, her relationship with her father seems to be the most likely referent.
This father­daughter relationship can be assessed based upon the other characteristics of "wife" as well. Social status depends upon social recognition consequent to
taking marriage vows. If a woman does not literally take the vows, she does not obtain the status. It is not requisite to performing wifelike domestic responsibilities,
however. When Dickinson's mother became ill, she was forced to take on many of the domestic and social responsibilities of a married woman. She writes in a letter
of 7 May 1850, "I have always neglected the culinary arts, but attend to them now from necessity, and from a desire to make everything pleasant for father, and
Austin" (Selected Letters 38). The roles of hostess and housekeeper did sanction a share of status along with the responsibility. Emily would have merited some
"wifely" status in playing hostess to her father's guests. She comments on her status and duty in a satirical passage in the same letter:
I am yet the Queen of the court, if regalia be dust, and dirt ... Father and Austin still clamor for food, and I like a martyr am feeding them. Wouldn't you love to see me in these
bonds of great despair, looking around my kitchen, and praying for kind deliverance. ... My kitchen I think I called it, God forbid that it was, or shall be my own—God keep me from
what they call households, except that bright one of 'faith'! (Selected Letters 40)

She recognizes the rank of a wife; she calls herself a "Queen of the court." Yet the "court" is one of "dirt" and ''dust." She compares the subservient station of a wife to
that of a "martyr." The comparison is not an incredible one since the will and desires of a wife are sacrificed to her duties to husband and family. Emily Dickinson,
though unmarried, made this same sacrifice. She maintained the station of a wife and mother in her mother's stead. Consequently, her relationship with her father bears
that similarity as well, making it the most likely metaphorical referent.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 107

Since "wife" as metaphor seems the most plausible hypothesis for Dickinson's use of the term—as opposed to an unwed girl's fantasy or the experiences of some
"wife" other than herself—it is necessary to examine how this metaphor works in the poems. Poem 463 ("I live with Him—I see his face—'') discusses cohabitation.
She literally states in the opening line and repeats in line 9, "I live with Him—." The reference to cohabitation in poem 461 ("A Wife—at Daybreak I shall be—") is
less obvious. This poem examines the thoughts and feelings of a "Maid" on her wedding night, about to become a "Bride." While she waits in her bedroom, fumbling at
her "Childhood's prayer" (9), her husband or "Future climbs the Stair" (8). Although more obscure than 463, it is plausible that the couple live together in this house
with the bedroom and the "Stair," even if they have only recently taken up residence together.
The quality of "wife" as obedient to patriarchal command is also manifest in the poems. Beginning with the most literal example, poem 732 opens with "She rose to His
Requirement," depicting a wife rising to meet the "Requirement" or command of a patriarch or master. The subservience of a wife to patriarchal control is also evident
in the repeated capitalization of the masculine pronouns. While Dickinson's use of punctuation and capitalization is often disregarded as erratic and therefore not
worthy of decisive interpretation, the capitalization of the masculine pronouns is decidedly consistent throughout these poems and deserves consideration. Although
masculine pronouns, when capitalized, often refer to God, in the context of these poems, that is not the best interpretation. The poems deal directly with the subject of
wifehood, not religion. The reference might be to the religious notion of being "married" to God, but this concept refers to an elevated, spiritual commitment to God. It
isn't a relationship that entails housework. Given the mundane tone in the poems, it seems more credible that the pronouns allude to a father, patriarch, or husband.
That they are capitalized gives a strong emphasis to the prominence of the patriarch. In fact, they invoke the power and eminence of the ultimate
father/patriarch/husband; namely, God.
The social status and responsibility of a wife are especially pronounced in this series of poems. She grants the "wife" in the poems various elevated titles because of her
marital status. She refers to the wife as "Czar" (119, line 3), as "Empress" (1072, 4), and "Royal" (1072, 5). These terms describe the rank and position associated
with marriage. In 1072, she hails "wife" as a "Title divine," a reference to the social distinction given to married women. These seemingly laudatory titles, however, are
quite ironic. Her "Empress" is the "Empress of Calvary!", an empress of pain and anguish, not land, people, wealth, or even happiness. Such irony suggests that
Dickinson's attitude toward this distinction was dubious and it was not a title that she seemed to desire.
The poems also associate wifehood with responsibility and duty; the first stanza of poem 732 is a good example.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 108
She rose to His Requirement—dropt
The Playthings of Her Life
To take the honorable Work
Of Woman, and of Wife—

This stanza describes the young girl leaving her childhood pastimes to take on the responsibilities of womanhood. It is quite interesting to consider that she is not doing
this of her own accord, as she naturally matures or grows up. She does this because of "His Requirement." This can be an autobiographical comment on the situation
previously discussed—that she and her sister were forced to take care of her father and brother during the course of their mother's illness. She didn't have to be
married to feel like a wife. She did the "honorable Work" of one already.
Another attribute of wifehood that must be analyzed is that of sexual experience. Poem 461 "A Wife—at Daybreak I shall be" deals exclusively with this subject. Also
the sexual explicitness of 1072 ("Title divine—is mine!") and 1737 ("Rearrange a 'Wife's' affection!") is too prominent to be avoided. If Dickinson's ''wife" in the wife
poems is a metaphor for her relationship with her father and the poems introduce the subject of the sexual experiences, then it is conceivable that there was a sexual
event in Dickinson's relationship with her father. In treating this sensitive subject, it is perhaps best to proceed line by line through each of the poems and attempt to
ascertain where the meaning of "wife" in a sexual sense applies.
The first stanza of 199 states, "I'm 'wife'—I've finished that—/That other state—/I'm Czar—I'm 'Woman' now—/It's safer so—." In this stanza the term "wife" is
contrasted to "That other state." Clearly that other state refers to being unmarried, more specifically to girlhood. The interpretation of "That other state" as girlhood is
supported by the statement in line 3, "I'm 'Woman' now." Line 4, however, introduces a contradiction. Dickinson has stated in her letters and in other poems an
amount of disdain for wife and womanhood. How can she thus say, "It's safer so"? It is either an inconsistency or she is referring to a different aspect of womanhood.
In the other allusions, she was referring to the duties and subservience associated with a wife. She must now be referring to something different. The line makes sense if
that attribute is sexual experience. Sex is "safer" after it has been experienced. It is less physically and psychologically painful. As such both "wife" and "Woman" might
refer to a female who has experienced sex, as opposed to "That other state," virginity. This interpretation also makes sense in light of the last stanza. "This being
comfort—then/That other kind—was pain—." Womanhood in terms of duty and responsibility would not be a "comfort." In fact, Dickinson saw it as martyrdom.
Childhood, not womanhood, was ease and comfort in comparison. Womanhood in terms of sexual practice, however, would be more comfortable;

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 109

intercourse as a child would be painful. Just when she begins to divulge the source of this pain, she cuts herself short saying, "But why compare?/I'm 'Wife'! Stop
there!"
The sexual implications in poem 461 are more distinct. This poem is unmistakably about a young girl becoming a woman through sexual experience. She literally goes
to bed at night a "Maid" and is a woman or "wife" in the morning, "at Daybreak." Lines 3 and 4 read, "At Midnight, I am but a Maid,/How short it takes to make it
Bride." What possibly can occur overnight to transform a child into a woman, if not sexual intercourse? The second stanza suggests this interpretation. "Softly my
Future climbs the Stair,/I fumble at my Childhood's prayer/Soon to be a Child no more.'' The interpretation of these lines as a bride awaiting her groom on their
wedding night was discussed earlier. The last line, however, is quite puzzling. The poet writes, "Savior—I've seen the face—before!" In earlier versions of the poem,
Dickinson did not use the word "Savior"; it was instead "master." While the word "master" certainly makes a connection to patriarch or husband, as does "Savior," this
bride seems startled by her recognition. Surely, a bride must have met her master before this moment. Why should she be surprised at recognizing him now? Perhaps,
he is a figure that is too familiar, one whom she recognizes, but who should not be sharing her bed.
Poem 463 supports the suggestion of a familiar face, like that in poem 461, that is somehow too familiar. In this poem, she admits, "I live with Him—I see His face—/I
go no more away" (1–2). This is a strong indication that the indeterminate "Him" is her father. The reference to a sexual connection between the two comes in the
second stanza.
The Only One—forestalling Mine—
And that—by Right that He
Present a Claim invisible
No Wedlock—granted Me—

The word "Mine" in line 5 refers to "privacy," which occurs in line 4. The only person forestalling her privacy then is the "Him" with whom she lives. This "Him"
forestalls her privacy by right of some "Claim invisible." The invisible claim is contrasted with the visible claim of "Wedlock" mentioned in line 8. Wedlock presents to a
husband the claim of a sexual intercourse. Once wedded, the husband is free to claim the sexual favors that his wife dutifully renders. The man in this poem, however,
appears to be making such a claim upon the persona of the poem, most likely Dickinson, without the overt legality of "Wedlock." Further, after reiterating in the third
stanza that the "Him" is someone with whom she lives and "hear[s] His Voice," she reveals in the fourth stanza that the He has taught her that she has no power to stop
him.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 110

"Taught Me—by Time—the lower Way—/Conviction—Every day—/That Life like This—is stopless—." The word "stopless" is replaced later by "endless.'' Both
words suggest her utter powerlessness against this man. She can only submit to the "Claim invisible" that he makes of her.
Poem 1072 further develops the idea of "wife" without the external or overt manifestation of marriage. The first two lines read, "Title divine—is mine!/The Wife—
without the Sign!" Here, again, she possesses a "title" or "claim" to be a "wife" without the outward "Sign" of marriage, such as a ring, a certificate, or even a husband.
If she claims the title of wife despite no outward sign, the claim is conceivably on account of sexual activity. The "Empress of Calvary" image in line 4 could support
such an interpretation. Calvary, of course, refers to the place where Christ was crucified. By titling herself "Empress of Calvary," Dickinson sees her own suffering as
comparable to that of Christ's. The piercing and penetrating nature of the wounds that Christ received are often interpreted as analogous to sexual penetration. 6 As
previously noted, she saw herself as a "martyr," yet another comparison to Christ.
The last in this series of poems, 1737, is the most baffling. Because of its complexities, it will be cited here in full with a brief analysis following.
Rearrange a "Wife's" affection!
When they dislocate my Brain!
Amputate my freckled Bosom!
Make me bearded like a man!
Blush, my spirit, in thy Fastness—
Blush, my unacknowledged clay—
Seven years of troth have taught thee
More than Wifehood ever may!
Love that never leaped its socket—
Trust entrenched in narrow pain—
Constancy thro' fire—awarded—
Anguish—bare of anodyne!
Burden—borne so far triumphant—
None suspect me of the crown,
For I wear the "Thorns" til Sunset—
Then—my Diadem put on.
Big my Secret but it's bandaged—
It will never get away
Till the Day its Weary Keeper
Leads it through the Grave to thee.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 111

The first stanza is loaded with violent and disjointed anatomical imagery. The word "affection" in line one could refer either to a fond or tender feeling or to a
pathological mental or physical condition. The fact that it is a "'Wife's' affection" and that it is being "rearranged" is very jolting. The words ''dislocate" and "amputate" in
the next lines add to the sense of violent action upon the "Wife's affection," "Brain," and "Bosom." The second stanza suggests humiliation and embarrassment at
"Fastness" and "troth." The word "Blush" is repeated twice. Stanza three is full of acute pain and a feeling of betrayal. The anguish is "bare of anodyne!"; there is no
relief from the pain. The fifth stanza begins with the idea of a "Burden." This "burden" is likely a painful secret, an interpretation confirmed in the last stanza. That it is
"borne so far triumphant" indicates that no one has discovered the secret. In comparing the burden to the crown of "Thorns," she indicates its painful nature and alludes
again to an identity with Christ. The reference to Diadem is also significant. Diadem comes from the Greek "dia," meaning across, plus "dein," meaning to bind. She
seems to be bound to a painful burden. In the last stanza, the line "Big my Secret but it's bandaged" confirms this meaning. The word "bandaged" modifying "Secret"
indicates not only the hidden nature of the secret, but suggests that the secret concerns some sort of injury. No one will ever know for sure, however, since she will
carry it to her grave. The context of the whole poem suggests that the secret involves the violence, humiliation, betrayal, and anguish set forth in the preceding stanzas.
While the "wife" poems can be interpreted in a number of ways, one interpretation seems most satisfactorily to explain the diversity of expression in all of the poems.
This is the interpretation that the "wife" in these poems is a metaphor for a real relationship in Emily Dickinson's life. The relationship which best fits this metaphor is
that with her father. The sexual explicitness, symbols, and images in these poems suggest that this relationship involved a sexual event.
The ways in which Dickinson uses space in her poetry also offer evidence of her possible victimization. Her description of space suggests that writing for her was a
means of constructing a sense of safety or coping with threat. There are many poems in which she describes the house or home, often the model safe space, as a
threatening place. In contrast, she describes the grave as a safe, cheery place, often comparing it to a home. In yet other poems, she gives non­physical human
charactersistics, such as the mind, heart or soul, architectural features, in an attempt to construct safe spaces internally. In all these instances, she seems to be trying to
cope with a sense of threat, quite probably from within her own home, by recreating a sense of home or safety elsewhere.
British psychiatrist Anthony Fry describes safe space as "the conditions that sustain us" (1), including family, good health, and interpersonal relations, as well as
environmental conditions such as home and community. Since the home is where people eat, sleep, and spend time with the family, it is the

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 112

primary place of nourishment, rest, and loving companionship; it is the primary place of safety. When the home is threatened, by financial difficulty, burglary, even
sickness, people often suffer psychologically, sometimes severely. Threats to the home endanger a person's sense of safety and consequently their psychological
stability.
Interestingly, in many of her poems, Dickinson describes the home as a threatening yet inescapable place. In poem 1334, "How soft this Prison," she compares home
to a prison. The prison is described as "soft" and the restricting bars as "sweet" because it refers to a home, not an actual prison. Despite such positive adjectives, it is
also seen as "sullen," giving the house a brooding, depressing air. The varied references to "Prison,'' "Dungeon," and "Incarceration" add to the gloominess and indicate
the inescapability she associates with home. In poem 127 "'Houses—so the Wise Men tell me," she expresses her skepticism that any house, including the "Many
Mansions" which Christ attributes to "his Father," is "snugly built" enough to keep out "the tears" and "the storm." The distrust that she describes in "The way I read a
letter's this" also indicates that she felt unsafe in her own home. She goes to great pains to make sure the door is secure and the room empty before she "pick[s] the
lock" of the envelope. This mistrust, gloom, inescapability, and skepticism toward "home" suggest that Dickinson perceived home with apprehension, that it was not
entirely "safe."
In contrast, Dickinson describes the grave as a place of safety, often comparing it with a house or home. She seems to anticipate gaining a measure of security in death
that she cannot find in life. In poem 457 she describes tombs as "Sweet—safe—Houses" and as "Glad—gay—Houses," demonstrating the gaiety, security, and
happiness which she envisions a home should provide. In poem 1743, she describes the grave as "my little cottage," in which she "make[s] the parlor orderly" and "lay
[s] the marble tea." Once again the grave is described as a cheery and inviting place. Ironically both places are the residences of the dead. Poem 1701 "To their
apartment deep" also employs the grave as dwelling metaphor, although it lacks some of the cheerfulness of the above poems. Nevertheless, the poem does see the
grave as a place of safety and invulnerability as it is a place where "No ribaldry may creep." Feeling threatened and apprehensive about her own home, she yearns for
a home that is safe. Envisioning the grave as a safe, cheery space, she anticipates a sense of security in death that she did not receive in her own home.
Dickinson also turned inward, seeking comfort and security internally. Evidence of this is signified in the many poems in which she describes non­physical interior
"spaces," such as the heart, mind, and soul, in physical, architectural terms. The heart, however, is not seen as a safe space, nor is the mind. Both are vulnerable to
violation. The soul, however, seems to be impervious to such encroachment.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 113

In poem 1567, the heart is described in spatial and architectural terms; it has "many doors." Poem 928 "The Heart has narrow Banks" describes the sea in spatial
terms as a metaphor for the passions of the heart. Bounded by "narrow banks" and "measur[ing] like the Sea," the heart has "insufficient Area'' when it encounters a
hurricane or emotional trauma. The heart in this state "learns/that Calm is but a Wall/of unattempted Gauze"; tranquility is unprotected within such a wall. "An instant's
Push demolishes/A Questioning—dissolves." While architecturally defined with area, measurements, even walls, the heart does not have sound, impenetrable
enclosures. Rather, it is fragile and vulnerable as a space. It is unsafe.
In 632, "The Brain is wider than the Sky," Dickinson describes the vastness of the mind, giving it dimensionality in breadth, depth, and weight. In 280 "I felt a Funeral
in my Brain" the mind has the physical space to accommodate a social gathering. The lines, "And creak across my Soul" and "then a Plank in Reason, broke," suggest
the mind has a floor, a boundary defining physical space, and tangible material construction. While this construction is sounder than the gauze walls of the heart, it is still
penetrable. A "plank in reason" can, despite its rigidity, be broken.
In poem 1142 "The props assist the House," Dickinson asserts that the "perfected Life," like a house, is built into a "Soul." Just as props are used in the building of a
house, they also asssist in the building of the soul. The poem sets up a comparison between the physical architectural space of a house, including the way it is
constructed, and the interior space of the soul. The comparison works well because a house also frames the development of the soul, a development which occurs for
the most part in the home. Dickinson also describes the soul architecturally in 1055 "The Soul should always stand ajar," giving it tangible space and a bolt and door.
The metaphor is similar to that of 303 "The Soul selects her own Society," except in the latter poem, the soul is personified as inhabiting a physical space instead of
being that space. As a space, the soul seems to be the most sound, an idea consistent with Dickinson's equating the grave with a safe home.
Ultimately, it is poem 670 "One need not be a Chamber—to be Haunted" that best illustrates how Dickinson compares the inner regions of the psyche to unprotected
physical space. In this poem, she does not distinguish between mind, heart, or soul. She refers to "Brain" and "Body" alike, comparing the whole being to the space of
a house with chambers and corridors. The entire poem follows:
One need not be a Chamber—to be Haunted—
One need not be a House—
The Brain has Corridors—surpassing
Material Place—

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 114
Far safer, of a Midnight Meeting
External Ghost
Than its interior Confronting—
That Cooler Host.
Far safer, through an Abbey gallop,
The Stones a'chase—
Than Unarmed, one's a 'self encounter—
In lonesome Place—
Ourself behind ourself, concealed—
Should startle most—
Assassin hid in our Apartment
Be Horror's least
The Body—borrows a Revolver—
He bolts the Door—
O'erlooking superior spectre—
Or More—

In representing a human being as a tangible space, she suggests that the mind can be violated and it can be haunted. Dickinson then asserts that it is horrifying to
examine one's own haunting or to recognize one's own violation. The power with which she expresses this idea also attests to the possibility that Dickinson was
personally violated. She seems to wrestle with this internal "Ghost" and with her own psychological stability regularly. Some threatening event not only penetrated her
own home but her own person, as well.
Some event occurred in the early 1860s that caused Dickinson an enormous amount of pain. An interpretation of Dickinson's relationship with her father in terms of
the "wife" poems suggests that Dickinson saw herself as fulfilling the role of wife to him. Given the sexual references in the poems, some sexual event in the father­
daughter relationship is likely to have been a cause for Dickinson to adopt the voice of a "wife." That Dickinson seems to view her home as unsafe, even threatening,
seems to support such an argument. In contrast, she visualizes the grave as a homey place of safety and happiness and the soul as an internal space, which is
impervious to violation. While she materializes the mind and heart into physical spaces, ultimately both are vulnerable to emotional and psychological "haunting."
Through spatial imagery, defining non­physical spaces in architectural terms and imbuing them with the characteristics of home, Dickinson uses her writing to create
safe space, a sense of comfort and security that she never fully attained in her lifetime.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 115

Notes
1. I was unable to locate a study that dealt with the violence in Dickinson's poetry. While the biographical explanations of her "crisis" period that I consulted generally
ignore the violent images, my research was not exhaustive. The authoritiative biographers such as Sewall, Bianchi, Todd, Johnson, and Whicher do not treat this
subject.
2. While I only cite directly from Finkelhor, I consulted Jean Goodwin, Sexual Abuse: Incest Victims and Their Families (Boston: John Wright, 1982) and Judith
Lewis Herman and Lisa Hirschman, Father­Daughter Incest (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1981).
3. Emily Dickinson was the middle child of the three children of Edward and Emily Norcross Dickinson. Emily had an older brother, Austin, who married Susan
Gilbert, one of Emily's close friends. She also had a younger sister, Lavinia, who, like Emily, never married.
4. The first volume of Johnson's collection of Dickinson's letters contains these early letters to Abiah Root, Susan Gilbert, Jane Humphrey, and others.
5. The personal nature of her poems, written only for herself and for close friends and family members and not for publication, also suggests that she was writing about
herself. The first person pronoun, I, is the most frequently occurring word in all 1775 poems. With the exception of only a handful, these poems were not even
discovered until after her death. She wrote them, sorted them, tied them in little bundles with thread and hid them. It seems undeniable, given the introspective and
secretive nature of her writing, that all of those first person I's could refer to no one but herself.
6. The ecstacy of St. Theresa being pierced by the angel's arrow is a similar analogy. Visually represented in the famed Bernini sculpture, this ecstacy is interpreted as
both spiritual and physical.
Works Cited
Bianchi, Martha Dick. Emily Dickinson Face to Face: Unpublished Reminisciences and Letters. Boston: Houghton, 1932.
Bianchi, Martha Dick. The Life and Letters of Emily Dickinson. Boston: Houghton, 1924.
Bingham, Millicent Todd. Emily Dickinson's Home: Letters of Edward Dickinson and His Family. New York: Harper, 1955.
Dickinson, Emily. Emily Dickinson Selected Letters. Edited by Thomas H. Johnson. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1958.
Dickinson, Emily. Letters of Emily Dickinson. Edited by Mabel Loomis Todd. New York: World, 1951.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 116

Dickinson, Emily. The Letters of Emily Dickinson. Edited by Thomas H. Johnson. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1958.
Dickinson, Emily. The Poems of Emily Dickinson. Edited by Thomas H. Johnson. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1995.
Finkelhor, David. Sexually Victimized Children. New York: The Free Press, 1979.
Fry, Anthony. Safe Space: How to Survive in a Threatening World. London: J. M. Dent & Sons, 1987.
Mossberg, Barbara A.C. Emily Dickinson: When a Writer Is a Daughter. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1982.
Sewall, Richard S. The Life of Emily Dickinson. New York: Ferrar, Straus and Giroux, 1974.
Wolff, Cynthia Griffin. Emily Dickinson. Reading, MA: Addison­Wesley, 1988.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 117

"There is no home there": Re(his)tor(iciz)ing Captivity and the Other in Spofford's "Circumstance"
Lisa Logan
I.
Spaces can be real and imagined. Spaces can tell stories and unfold histories. Spaces can be interrupted, appropriated, and transformed through artistic and literary practice.
—bell hooks, Yearning: Race, Gender, and Cultural Politics

In Hard Facts, Phillip Fisher argues that the nineteenth­century American novel "executes the past" through popular forms. This "retroactive" use of the past—in
popular settings and stories that recognize, repeat, and "work through" it—"transform[s] the present" by rationalizing and making acceptable ''hard facts," including the
killing of Indians, the system of slavery, and industrial capitalism (3–8). The historical novel thus rehistoricizes and naturalizes an American history that is already
complete. Fisher's point is that historical fiction imposes on its subject a narrative that suits the ideological present—that the spaces of American history, including the
wilderness, home, and city, are, to paraphrase bell hooks, subject to appropriation and tranformation through literary practice. Fisher's argument illustrates how the
uncomfortable facts of American history can be contained and made safe through narrative.
This safety is often achieved through the use of racialized discourses. As Toni Morrison's Playing in the Dark has shown, a reexamination of the Africanist presence
in American literature uncovers the assumptions and ideologies of Anglo American writers. Morrison demonstrates that figures of race are central to narratives of
Anglo American selfhood; through these figures, Anglo writers confront their own national and cultural identities. The Africanist presence, Morrison argues, has
permitted American writers to contemplate risky subjects in safety (28).

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 118

Narratives of cultural identity are closely tied to the ideologically charged spaces of American national and individual histories. As Biddy Martin and Chandra Talpade
Mohanty point out, identities are linked to ideologically grounded "homespaces." They argue that the perceived safety of home is founded on unquestioned
assumptions about self and Other:
[Home] refers to the place where one lives within safe, protected boundaries; 'not being home' is a matter of realizing that home was an illusion based on the exclusion of specific
histories of oppression and resistance, the repression of differences even within oneself. (196)

For Martin and Mohanty, "home" becomes a metaphor for identity. "Home" represents a set of positions that we occupy unself­consciously; the ideological
underpinnings of these positions are covered over and unacknowledged.
I wish to locate the captivity narrative and Harriet Prescott Spofford's short story "Circumstance," a nineteenth­century revision of this genre, at the interstices of
Fisher's, Morrison's, and Martin and Mohanty's theories. To convey and stabilize the cultural meaning of American selfhood, the captivity narrative depends on
configurations of the American landscape, such as home and wilderness, in which gendered and racialized ideologies are imbedded. According to Fisher, the captivity
narrative "miniaturizes" early national history, casting Anglo Saxon "invaders as prisoners" (43) and legitimizing their campaign of genocide against Native Americans. It
typically traces the white victim's capture, imprisonment, rescue, and restoration against the dramatic and binarily opposed settings of home and wilderness. For
women writers, this movement between home and wilderness, safety and danger, is further complicated by their disempowered positions in a dominant culture that
maps its racialized and gendered ideologies onto their bodies and which struggles to make women's acts and words "safe.'' In a culture that determines when and how
women can be subjects in discourse and that imposes material sanctions on women who do not comply, women who write about captivity tread a tricky path between
safety and danger.
Mary Rowlandson's captivity narrative The Sovereignty and Goodness of God (1682), for example, explicitly underscores her position of safety within a culture that
aggressively contains women's difference and disorder within hegemonic structures. Throughout her narrative, Rowlandson negotiates safe spaces from which to
speak, spaces which have been disrupted by her Indian captivity and by Puritan attitudes toward "public" women and their speech. Rowlandson fashions acceptable
narrative positions for herself, including that of chaste and pious Christian, Puritan goodwife and deputy husband. She constructs her captors as her polar opposite, the
savage and heathen racial

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 119
1

Other. Against this fixed and stereotyped notion of the Other, the woman writer negotiates a safe discursive position.
At the same time, however, the very presence of the Other disrupts and brings into question that safety. The captivity experience unsettles the spatial categories of
home and wilderness, exposing the ideologies on which they rest as tenuous. The certainty of these spaces is predicated on unexamined assumptions about and
uncontested distinctions between self and Other, right and wrong, truth and lies. The captivity experience destabilizes these assumptions and distinctions and challenges
the ideological foundations underlying the safety of home. In the captivity narrative, as in Martin and Mohanty's essay on identity politics, home becomes not only a
physical space but a metaphor for women's unsettled and unsettling position.
In revisiting the captivity narrative, Harriet Prescott Spofford's short story "Circumstance" is similarly concerned with woman's cultural and discursive "place." The
story transpires in the wilderness and domestic spaces of America's early national history. In representing the captivity narrative from a nineteenth­century perspective,
Spofford's story engages in the politics of historicization; she "interrupts, appropriates, and transforms" history's spaces. In Spofford's narrative, as in the early
American captivity narrative, domestic and wilderness spaces serve as metaphors for hegemonic definitions of safety and danger which are mapped onto "woman" and
which threaten to erase female subjectivity. As in nineteenth­century romantic fiction, Spofford invokes cultural configurations of race as she engages questions of
American space and woman's ''place." Like Rowlandson's narrative, "Circumstance" is concerned with woman's negotiation of safe spaces in culture and in discourse.
In negotiating woman's position, Spofford's story brings into tension women's literary traditions, American romanticism, and figures and discourses of race. Ultimately,
she seems to challenge the stability of these categories and, in doing so, to question the safety of woman's "place" in the national spaces of home and wilderness.
II.
There is no home there. The log­house, the barns, the neighboring farms, the fences, are all blotted out and mingled in one smoking ruin. Desolation and death were indeed there,
and beneficence and life in the forest.
—"Circumstance"

Spofford sets her story in the margins, at the edge of the northern forest of Maine and, as Anne Dalke has pointed out, explores the tenuousness of

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 120

experience. That tenuousness, I argue, stems from the text's collapsing of typical categories of home and wilderness. The heroine has spent the day at the "home" of a
sick friend, a home associated with illness, pain, and death. Unlike Rowlandson, who often "can not find her way," she is not afraid to enter the forest alone and
perceives ''the sweet homefeeling of a young and tender wintry wood" (84, my emphasis). As this "sincere and earnest woman" "sallie[s] forth" into the evening
wilderness, her husband remains at home with the baby. She must traverse three miles of woods to get home, described as "one of a dozen log­houses ... with their
half­cleared demesnes separating them ... from a wilderness untrodden save by stealthy native or deadly panther tribes" (84). The ominous proximity of the "stealthy
native" and "deadly panther tribes" undercuts the security and safety of home. Home is situated at the edge of a "great forest," in "half­cleared demesnes"; while
Spofford's language is apparently oppositional, it also suggests the mutually dependent natures of home and wilderness—one is made possible only by the "clearing
away" of the other. This language undercuts and problematizes the opposition of home to wilderness and recalls Martin and Mohanty's observation that home is "an
illusion of coherence and safety based on ... exclusion ... [and] repression" (196). While nineteenth­century culture represses what lies outside home as "Other,"
Spofford's story seems to forward home's uncertain and illusory qualities. Home is never quite "cleared" of the wilderness; the forest compromises its "domain"—
questions the rights and privileges which it assumes.
The heroine's "captivity" aloft in a tree in the "arms" of an "Indian Devil" panther reenacts the captivity narrative's concern with home and wilderness, and the
relationships between these categories and women's subjectivity. Like Rowlandson, who negotiates safe speaking positions before an audience wary of women's
public speech, Spofford's heroine's voice—her singing—meets the demands of her captor, satisfies her instinct, and represents conscious choices and strategies. Her
song at once complies with and questions essentialist definitions of women's words: "Again her lips opened by instinct but the sound that issued thence came by
reason. She had heard that music charmed wild beasts..."(86). Her singing is a choice, a substitution of song for scream. What she sings is inadvertent and
unconscious: "[A] little thread of melody stole out, a rill of tremulous motion; it was the cradle­song with which she rocked her baby..."(86). Although she sings an
expected song, one seemly for a woman and a mother, the circumstances of her singing disrupt the "safety" of cultural images of "woman." The picture of a mother
singing her child to sleep before the hearth, which a lullaby invokes, alters to a woman rocking and singing in the arms of a dark and savage panther. By shifting the
circumstances of the heroine's singing from home to wilderness, Spofford suggests that a woman's voice might be heard in other spaces than the home.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 121

"Circumstance" questions safe categories of home and wilderness in other ways as well. One of the first images to cross the heroine's mind following her capture is of
her child "sleeping rosily" and "the father cleaning his gun, with one foot on the green wooden rundle" (86). The home, traditionally the domain of the wife, is here
secured by the father; the wife, typically safe at home, confronts the wilderness alone. The images of her husband's well­oiled gun and his foot that rocks the cradle
bring into view exactly who "keeps" the home and at what cost. Distinctions between home and wilderness are blurred and uncertain. As the heroine endures her
torture, she dreams of home:
She fancied the light pouring through the chink and then shut in again, with all the safety and comfort and joy, her husband taking down the fiddle and playing lightly with his
head inclined, playing while she sang, while she sang for her life to an Indian Devil. Then she knew he was fumbling for and finding some shining fragment and scoring it down
the yellowing hair. ... (88)

Here Spofford juxtaposes the heroine's night peril with the idyllic "safety and comfort and joy" of the lit cabin. The heroine's singing to her husband's fiddle seems to
merge with her wilderness singing. She imagines her husband "playing while she sang, while she sang for her life to an Indian Devil." Her husband's safety and comfort
is almost at the expense of her danger. His "fumbling for and finding some shining fragment" parallels the fumbling of her captor's claws in her clothing, his "scoring it
down the yellowing hair" recalls the beast's "scoring'' of her white flesh. In this passage, distinctions between the safety of home and the danger of the wilderness are
made murky as the figure of the husband blurs into that of the beast. 2
Perhaps most ambivalent and uncertain is the story's attitude toward rescue. In Rowlandson's narrative, restoration constitutes reassimilation into her former home and
position. Yet her text questions this restoration through its depiction of her sleepless nights and constant worry over the uncertainty of her physical and spiritual safety.
"Circumstance," too, insistently challenges notions of rescue and the promise of safety held out by husband and home. With her husband's appearance, the heroine
forgets her "fervent vision of God's peace" and imagines only her log home:
Cheerful home sound then, how full of safety and all comfort and rest it seemed! what sweet morning incidents of sparking fire and sunshine, of gay household bustle, shinning
dresser, and cooing baby, of steaming cattle in the yard, and brimming milk­pails at the door! what pleasant voices! what laughter! what security! (95)

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 122

The heroine may recover this idyll only through the loss of her spiritual vision, her voice, and, of course, through more danger. Since the panther's body covers her
own, her husband's bullet must "pierce her body" before "reaching any vital part of the beast" (94). Domestic bliss is possible only at the expense—indeed the
annihilation—of her voice and self. Her vision of her happy home is followed by her discovery that "her voice was hoarse and sharp,—every tone cut like a knife,—
the notes became heavy to lift,—withheld by some hostile pressure,—impossible. One gasp, a convulsive effort, and there was silence..." (95). Home and safety, the
passage seems to imply, are exclusive of woman's voice. Her silence is effected by some "hostile pressure,'' which is at once the physical strain of singing all night and,
perhaps, the presence of cultural forces militated against women's expression.
Ironically, it is the beast—the Indian Devil, the violent Other—who saves her. The panther, spying her husband, springs up and seizes her, and her husband fires. The
Indian Devil's body breaks his captive's fall and rescues her from her husband's gunfire. "Circumstance" seems to ask who the Other really is, who has the power to
rescue, and what that rescue implies.
But Spofford has still more questions about home and safety. Returning to their log­house, the family discovers "no home there" (96). Their settlement has burned to
the ground in an apparent Indian attack. As the two look on, the husband's gun falls away from him, reinforcing his inability to "rescue." They are faced with a curious
truth: "Desolation and death were indeed there, and beneficence and life in the forest" (96). "Circumstance" questions the boundaries between safety and danger and
inverts the assumptions beneath early America's opposing definitions of home and wilderness.
III.
Fire is not half ourselves; as it devours, arouses neither hatred nor disgust; is not to be known by the strength of our lower natures let loose; does not drip our blood into our faces
from foaming chops, nor mouth nor slaver above us with vitality. Let us be ended by fire, and we are ashes, for the winds to bear, the leaves to cover; let us be ended by wild beasts,
and the base, cursed thing howls with us forever through the forest.
—"Circumstance"

In Playing in the Dark, Toni Morrison links the Africanist presence in American literature to nineteenth­century American romanticism. The romantic tradition, she
observes, offered Anglo American writers a strategy for dealing with their "New World" fears and for exploring Americans' boundless capacity for uncertainty; the
African American served as a metaphor for the

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 123

limitless terror Anglo Americans faced and which they termed the "power of blackness." These romantic fears are, of course, cast in a different light for women, whose
marginalized positions in nineteenth­century culture necessarily complicate Morrison's characterization of the romantic "terror of human freedom." Throughout
"Circumstance," 3 Spofford's use of race exists in tension with her more explicit critique of dominant cultural narratives about woman's "place." I suggest that we read
this tension as a cultural politics. We might ask, how do figures of race and racialized discourses allow Spofford to contemplate dangerous subject matter safely?
The captivity narrative relies on figures of race to negotiate American history and cultural identity. The threat of national and cultural disorder is expressed in the
unsettled wilderness and mapped onto an inexplicably "savage" racial Other. Spofford's nineteenth­century captivity narrative negotiates the spaces of American
history from a woman's perspective, exploring home and wilderness as positions from which women might speak. Spofford's story challenges categories of home and
wilderness, a challenge which depends on the story's use of the racial Other, onto whom ideas about violence, power, and sexuality are displaced. I wish to consider
how this displacement at once questions and conserves racialized categories of self and Other. Specifically, the figure of the Indian Devil affords Spofford a site for
exploring in safety culturally disruptive notions about woman's "place."
Judith Fetterley has argued that Spofford's Indian Devil is a metaphor for "unrestrained male sexuality ... often let loose on the bodies of women" (226). The Indian
Devil "lick[s] her bare arm with his rasping tongue and pour[s] over her the wide stream of his hot foetid breath" (86). She "saw instinctively the fierce plunge" of his
claws, and feels them tear her with "agony" and "quivery disgust'' (86). Caught in his "great lithe embrace," she sees with horror white and red—his white tusks, red
glaring eyes, and long red tongue, her own white flesh and crimson blood. As Fetterley notes, the passage can be read as "an experience of 'rape,' a nightmare as
likely to occur in the home as in the woods" (266). This violence, I argue, at once historicizes and sexualizes nineteenth­century relationships between Native American
men and Anglo American women. In this way, the "Indian Devil's" death is made "safe."
The image of the husband with his gun seems consistently and closely linked to sexual violation. When her captor first seizes her, she calls not upon God but on her
husband. Her singing is punctuated by images of her husband safe at home, rocking the baby, cleaning his gun, rosining his bow. At one point, his fingerwork at the
fiddle blurs into the Indian Devil's clawing at her body. Her husband's approach is heralded by "[a] remote crash of brushwood [that] told of some other beast on his
depredations" (93). His intrusion marks yet another violation—her loss of voice and vision. It may be, as Fetterley contends, that Spofford's Indian Devil encodes the
violence men promise for

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 124

women at home, an encoding that Spofford anticipates her women readers will understand. The racialized "beast," then, offers a safe space for Spofford to articulate
such a revolutionary notion.
But I suggest that this reading needs to be complicated for a number of reasons. First, I suggest that we consider the violence the heroine endures from her sexualized
and racialized captor within other paradigms. Fetterley asks us to view the story in terms of the "violation and vulnerability" women faced when they entered into art.
Invoking Hawthorne's remarks that literature should "exhibit women's bodies, naked, without restraint of decency," Fetterley argues that the violence in
"Circumstance'' represents women's sense of "shame and loathing at such enforced and public exposure" (265). I contend, however, that dominant cultural
constructions of "true womanhood" are equally violent in that they threaten to erase women's subjectivity. Essentialist definitions of "woman" and her "place" violate
women by demanding that they enact their lives and works according to hegemonic definitions. The panther promises punishment if the singing fails to please. Similarly,
nineteenth­century American culture's expectations for women's acts and words promise the withdrawal of those privileges extended to feminine "virtue" if women fail
to live up to those expectations. The promise of privilege to the virtuous implies that certain women may deserve a whole range of violent and punitive remunerations,
which could include bad reviews, failure to find work, abandonment, and rape. Violence, therefore, is linked not only to women's vulnerability or wish to remain
private. Rather, one's biological circumstance, being born a woman, invites exposure, scrutiny, and, possibly, violation. The heroine's vocal response to her capture
and violation places in tension woman's voice and her violation. The juxtaposition of these terms recalls that captivity has historically been a pretext for women's writing
as well as a place where the meaning of women's subjectivity has been struggled over. The captivity narrative, produced in an era that punished women's public
speech with excommunication and banishment, concerns women's negotiation of discursive space. Spofford substitutes the Indian Devil of her maternal grandmother's
legend for Rowlandson's "heathens," and the heroine's singing replaces Rowlandson's "true story." 4
As Anne K. Mellor argues, romanticism "requires the construction of an Other, which is seen as a threat to the originating subject ..." (3). The romantic artist
constructs his beloved as Other, who must be possessed, consumed, effaced, and destroyed if he is to achieve his goal. According to Mellor, consummation "can only
be achieved through the literal annihilation of the consciousness of the division between the lover and his beloved" (26). Mellor's comments recall the famous American
romantic heroines, Ligeia, Madeline Usher, Beatrice Rappaccini, all victims of violent male artist figures. Spofford, whose style and subject matter place her within
traditions of American romanticism,5 writes from a discursive moment that mythologized the male artist and

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 125

predicated his aesthetic transcendence on the possession and destruction of the female Other. In returning to the captivity narrative to imagine her female artist (the
singing heroine), Spofford returns to a genre in which the racialized Other enables the subject's spiritual vision and conversion. The racialized Indian Devil provides
both a safe and dangerous site for exploring the woman artist's position and voice.
But the panther does not merely represent the Other. As in Rowlandson's captivity narrative, in which the wilderness experience destabilizes categories of self and
Other, and as in romantic fiction, in which, as Morrison writes, the "subject of the dream is the dreamer" (17), Spofford's text conflates categories of self and Other.
The narrator observes that, unlike fire, beasts such as the Indian Devil are "half ourselves" when "the strength of our lower natures [are] let loose" (89). I find it
significant that the beast's consonance is with "our'' natures, implying that boundaries such as human/beast, white/Indian, Christian/heathen, and male/female are
indistinct. This indistinctness is perhaps most visible when the husband shoots the panther out of the tree, and there follows "a terrible yell of desperation ... that filled
her ears with savage echoes" (95). Here Spofford removes the agency from this "terrible yell." Whether these "savage echoes" issue from the panther, the husband, or
the woman herself is left—deliberately, I think—ambiguous. The question of agency here foregrounds the collapsing of categories that Spofford effects and hints
quietly that woman's voice might articulate the unseemly. The panther—the racialized figure, the easy stereotype—affords Spofford a strategy through which to
explore this possibility obliquely and in safety.
IV.
Oh, was there no remedy? Was there nothing to counteract it, nothing to dissipate that black drop, to make it colorless, powerless, harmless, a thing of air? Were there no sweet,
good people among all those dead and gone women? ... What gifts were these grandmothers going to give the child then? she asked.
—Spofford, "The Godmothers"

"Circumstance," a revision of the early American captivity narrative, "interrupts, appropriates, and transforms" the spaces of American history as they map dominant
ideologies onto women's bodies. The story is concerned with "place," which I have tried to define as at once the physical settings of home and wilderness and the
ideological categories of self/Other, man/woman imbedded in them. "Circumstance" struggles with the meanings and uses of the past from the nineteenth­century
present Spofford occupied. In considering what those

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 126

meanings and uses might be, I turn to Spofford's short story "The Godmothers" (1896).
Like "Circumstance," "The Godmothers" focuses on the collision of two worlds. The heroine, Rosomond, has left her American home for marriage to a L'Aiglenoir and
has just given birth to an heir in her husband's "ancestral stronghold.'' As the heroine lies "faint and weak" in a "dim vast chamber," the L'Aiglenoir grandmothers "step
from [the] frames" of their sea­gallery portraits (207), reminding the heroine of their history of scandal, forgery, counterfeit, adultery, opium, poison, cruelty, the
guillotine, and the madhouse—a history of "black blood" (214). Rosomond responds to these visitors with terror, crying "What gifts were these grandmothers going to
give the child then?" (215).
Like "Circumstance," this story is concerned with a history of "blood," only the politics of possession and empire are displaced onto the French aristocracy. Its
concern with national "color" is displaced onto the "purples and scarlets" of the European grandmothers versus Rosomond's own wan and pallid American ancestors.
Rosomond's question—what shall be passed on to her child?—is, according to Phillip Fisher, the question of all American writers: What is the relationship of history to
the national identity of the present? I suggest that "The Godmothers" speaks intertextually to the American romantic fiction and women's captivity traditions which
Spofford worked within by engaging this question. Spofford attempts to work out a safe and "usable past" from which to speak and which to pass on.
The story seems expressly concerned with woman­centered traditions. Rosomond's husband is "away on the water, or in the hunt, or at the races" (208). The
L'Aiglenoir stronghold has historically been kept by its women, who, to bring the family its lands and titles, traded themselves and their integrity. Rosomond at first
discounts them as "all only tradition," saying that their lives "would have been dreadful if [the stories] were true" (209). Her husband reminds her, however, that
"happiness has no history," "virtue has few adventures," and that "the big wills, the big passions" are "memorable ... and drown out the others" (209–10). His words
seem to address directly Spofford's own position within women's and canonical literary traditions. What is her "place" to be? What is her relationship to her literary
descendants and ancestors? What will be remembered and how?
"The Godmothers" centers its treatment of American history and literary traditions, as in "Circumstance," on color. Rosomond contrasts the "pallor of her colonial and
nineteenth­century New England grandmothers with the "purples and scarlets of [European] women of great passions, of scope, of daring and deed and electric
force" (214). Rosomond views Anglo American women's histories and traditions as wan and disempowered. She imagines her New England ancestors:

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 127
Far off, by the curtain of the doorway, huddled together like a flock of frightened doves—gentle ladies, quiet, timid, humble before heaven, ladies of placid lives, no opportunities,
small emotions, narrow routine, praying by form, acting by precedent, without individuality, whose goodness was negative, whose doings were paltry, their drab beings swamped,
and drowned, and extinguished. ... (214)

Rosomond's grandmothers are colorless as drab doves, adhering to the outward forms of religion and culture in dull lives that fail to question the "narrow routine" of
woman's "place." In leaving America for Europe, Rosomond rejects her American grandmothers' "passive virtues" of self­effacement, self­sacrifice, and quiet
acceptance for ''great drama" and a "larger nature." Her choice seems to suggest a failure to locate within American culture a place from which to counter its "pallid"
narratives of femininity.
"The Godmothers" represents Spofford's engagement with divergent narratives of American history and literary tradition. The L'Aiglenoirs recall the uncomfortable
truths about America's past that "Circumstance" invokes: colonial expansion and the genocide of Native Americans. The L'Aiglenoir family was borne of rape, after a
"sea­rover had scaled the heights" of a lady's castle and "taken her, loathing and hating him, to wife" (212). This family history speaks to both the disturbing history of
American expansionism and the impact of patriarchal culture on racialized and gendered Others. Out of these tensions emerged a tradition of Anglo women's writing
based on the domestic and wilderness captivity of women's lives, a tradition which, like dominant cultural narratives and canonical literary traditions, often relied on
figures of race and color.
"The Godmothers" seems to respond to troublesome American histories and traditions by reimagining a whitewashed and safe space from which the young child, the
L'Aiglenoir of the twentieth century, like the woman writer, might emerge. Such a space is figured forth in the beautiful and "original savage," "swift and supple ... with
free and fearless foot, large­limbed and lofty as Thusnelda, clad in her white wolfskin, with the cloud of her yellow hair fallen about her, carrying her green bough,
strong, calm, sure" (216). In Spofford's "original savage" a romanticized Native American woman blurs into a curiously Nordic goddess. Her values are "... scorn for
the ignoble, trust in thy fellow, dependence on thine own lust sinew and unconquerable will,—familiar friend of hardship and content, spare, and pure, and strong,—
joy in the earth, the sun, the wind, faith in the unseen" (216). This noble savage, her blonde whiteness a product of nineteenth­century aesthetics of feminine beauty,
represents "the unpolluted, strong, wild strain in [her son's] blood, the vital savage" (216).
"The Godmothers" attempts to rewrite American history onto an Anglo woman's body, to construct a history and tradition that is safe to pass on. The

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 128

story evinces an incredible amount of anxiety about nation, Anglo American women, and American history and literary traditions. Spofford maintains the integrity of
"blood" by positing the pre­colonial, pre­slavery, and insistently white body of a European ancestral godmother. In this way, she makes the spaces of history and
tradition "safe." Rosomond's husband tells her that "pictures are no more certified than the traditions'' (210). "Circumstance" and "The Godmothers" attempt to
reimagine and transform American history and traditions. Her fiction presents its own gallery of pictures that revises the spaces in which history and tradition have
mapped discursive and cultural meanings onto women's bodies. In trying to make these spaces "safe," her fiction is no more or less "certified" than those histories it
appropriates and transforms. Spofford's is a whitewashed "picture" in the gallery, illustrating what is at stake in making American spaces safe.
Notes
1. For a more detailed discussion of Rowlandson's negotiation of discursive space, see my "Mary Rowlandson and the 'Place' of the Woman Subject."
2. Judith Fetterley writes about the sexual overtones of the panther's attack, arguing that it represents the displaced and menacing sexual power of men "who cannot
be the woman's husband," that is, Native Americans. Fetterley argues that, although the text hints that "home is where the beasts are," it "stops short" of identifying the
husband with the panther (267). Fetterley concludes that Spofford's story exemplifies the pervasive racist imagination of nineteenth­century white writers. My reading,
however, suggests that Spofford's boundaries are less explicit than Fetterley implies. I wish to explore the relationship of Spofford's use of race to American literary
and historical spaces.
3. Spofford's other works, such as "The Amber Gods," "The Black Bess," "The Moonstone Mass," and "The Godmothers," operate this way as well.
4. Halbeisen describes the story's inception in Prescott family legend. Spofford's links to Rowlandson are even more coincidental than her use of captivity conveys: the
Prescott family settled in Lancaster, Massachusetts and was probably living there at the time that Rowlandson was taken captive.
5. Bendixen makes this point in more detail, xxii.
Works Cited
Bendixen, Alfred. "Introduction" to 'The Amber Gods' and Other Stories by Harriet Prescott Spofford. Ed. Alfred Bendixen. New Brunswick: Rutgers University
Press, 1989.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 129

Dalke, Anne. "'Circumstance' and the Creative Woman: Harriet Prescott Spofford." Arizona Quarterly 41.1 (Spring 1985): 71–85.
Fetterley, Judith, ed. Provisions: A Reader from Nineteenth­Century American Women. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1985.
Fisher, Phillip. Hard Facts: Setting and Form in the American Novel. New York: Oxford University Press, 1985.
Halbeisen, Elizabeth K. Harriet Prescott Spofford: A Romantic Survival. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1985.
hooks, bell. Yearning: Race, Gender, and Cultural Politics. Boston: South End Press, 1990.
Logan, Lisa. "Mary Rowlandson and the 'Place' of the Woman Subject." Early American Literature 28:3 (Winter 1993): 255–77.
Martin, Biddy and Chandra Talpade Mohanty. "Feminist Politics: What's Home Got to Do With It?" Feminist Studies/Critical Studies. Ed. Teresa de Lauretis.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1986.
Mellor, Anne K. Romanticism and Gender. New York: Routledge, 1993.
Morrison, Toni. Playing in the Dark: Whiteness and the Literary Imagination. New York: Vintage, 1992.
Spofford, Harriet Prescott. 'The Amber Gods' and Other Stories. Ed. Alfred Bendixen. New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press, 1989.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 131

"Entirely Unprotected": Rebecca Ketcham's Trail Diary
Mary Sylwester
Safe space for women on the overland trails was complicated by the coordinates of the adventure. In the early nineteenth century, overwhelming physical danger was
perceived to arise from the geographical region between the Missouri and Columbia Rivers, a space inhabited by alien peoples and fraught with unknown hazards. To
step across the western border of Iowa or Missouri in those days meant to expose oneself and one's family to the insecurity posed by a lack of regulation. No towns,
and few forts, intervened in the vast expanse from Council Bluffs to the Columbia River. In leaving friends and family, emigrants risked losing support networks and
social frames of reference and thus entered a cultural danger zone. Within the emigrant space, protection lay in the temporary dissolution of the wall between public
and private. A group economy satisfied the needs for organized physical protection and for ongoing social interaction. Strangers shared campfires, and the family
space merged with public areas. With the creation of that practical ad hoc community, however, persisted expectations that such a space, with its particular rules and
responsibilities, would be a transient phenomenon, limited to the emigrant project. Eastern social values and boundaries would reappear once the trip was over. In
emigrant narratives of the experience, however, the geographical danger zone occasionally disrupted social patterns to the extent that the end of the story could not be
played out in the fashion forecasted at the beginning of the narrative. For nineteenth­century women, who drew their identities in large part from their role within the
private sphere, that disruption became a danger in itself. For trail diarist Rebecca Ketcham, the writing of the experience grew to be impossible as the predicated
ending of her story lost its connection in the emigrant space to the subject position she came to inhabit.
Within the borders of the United States at mid­century, the rhetoric of domesticity made the private home an island of safety and serenity presided over by the mother.
Nineteenth­century female writers such as Catharine Beecher, Lydia Sigourney, Lydia Maria Child, Susan Warner, and the popular

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 132

Fanny Fern preached that the individual family home was meant to be a special and secure feminine domain, in which the moral character as well as the physical health
of future generations was formed. Catharine Beecher declared in The American Woman's Home that "the family state ... is the aptest earthly illustration of the
heavenly kingdom, and in it woman is its chief minister" (19). The walls of the home sheltered women from the worldly pursuits of trade and legislature and guarded the
moral well­being of the family as the key to national virtue.
Leaving the eastern enclosure of the home for the wide­open West, then, exposed women to worldly influences and even endangered the sanctity of the family. That
so many women were willing to go seems extraordinary. Historians and critics have speculated that they must have been coerced by insistent husbands, or held captive
to masculine impulses to conquest. 1 From the perspective drawn in this scenario, the outdoor world of men, mud, and moneymaking reached in and swept women
out of their comfortable homes. Pioneer women are thus to be pitied. Another view, however, is possible. Women, according to the contemporary popular press,
were a source of formidable cultural power. The trek westward might be seen, therefore, not just as a dangerous ordeal, but also as an opportunity to recreate what
was culturally perceived as the safe spaces of home within an unbuilt landscape. From this alternative perspective, women were not exactly captives to the all­powerful
male world of commerce and conquest, but rather comprised a cultural Trojan Horse that depended on the outside world of men and machinations for movement.
At the beginning of her 1853 journey, Rebecca Ketcham saw herself in just such a position of power. She aligned herself squarely within a Beecheresque view of
women's role as cultural missionary. In the 1840s, Catharine Beecher organized a legion of female teachers to serve on the frontier, binding Christian duty, womanly
character, and national good: her National Popular Education Board sent dozens of single women westward, starting in 1847. The scheme of exporting women
teachers to the West found support in some of the most popular literature of the day: in Godey's Lady's Book of 1849 editor Sarah Josepha Hale wrote that the "plan
of sending female teachers from the Eastern States to the West" was of "far more importance to the improvement, and, we may add, prosperity of our land, than will
be all the gold of California."2 Hale appealed for continued public dedication to such service:
While the young men are thus going forth to gather gold, will not the benevolent and pious of our land contribute to send forth our young women to disseminate that wisdom
which must be taught, or the gold will prove a curse and not a blessing? (295)

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 133

Hale's metonymic identification of men with gold and women with wisdom seemed to elevate the position of the feminine, and yet reinforced a cultural separation
between the world of men and the realm of women. Wealth, apparently, was a "blessing," if its accumulation in the rough world of commerce could be supported by
the pleasant and gentle influences of teachers, wives, and mothers. The profession of teaching for women, although it may have seemed finally a way for spinster ladies
to support themselves in the workaday world, was hardly separable in contemporary discourse from the protected sanctuary of the home. Hale proclaimed the role as
"teacher of the young" to be woman's ''office, her mission" (355). Out of such rhetoric emerged women like Rebecca Ketcham, for whom teaching in the wilds of
Oregon was a once­in­a­lifetime opportunity.
At first, Ketcham's expectations for that opportunity guided the development of her narrative; as the unaccustomed life of the trail stretched on, however, her vision of
life "at home" in Oregon blurred into an increasing awareness of the interim space. Because a diary kept is as much a record of the efforts to work out a preconceived
narrative structure as it is a shaping of a new one, it is possible in the emigrant's journal to follow two stories at once: the development or disintegration of the forecast
plot of settlement together with the emergence of an independent story of the road. The well­bordered space of the home, so important to the success of women's
mission in the West, broke down in the fluid environment of the trail. Maintaining a separation between home and public areas was a near­impossibility as cooking,
washing, sleeping, and even more personal matters had to be accomplished outdoors within view of other people. In that exposed situation, the social distance
between men and women was diminished and borders between public and private became permeable. A symptom of that permeability was that women's household
chores were open to bargain: for example, women often cooked and baked for people outside their own families in exchange for supplies or draft animals. Or, as in
the case of Rebecca Ketcham, women might be required to provide such domestic services as part of the fee for their passage. The role of women, so well­confined
within walls at home, on the wide­open trail leaked into the world of public commerce.
In this disconcerting moment, when indoors became outdoors and the protecting borders of home were replaced by tentative lines on a map, the story of the road
impinged upon the narrative of progress. Michel Butor compares the movement of travelers through space to a writer's movement across a page: he draws an analogy
between the white space dividing units of meaning in a text and the waiting times between stops on a train route (Butor 1–16). For pioneers driving wagons across the
continent, unlike passengers on a faster trip, that white space could not be ignored. Between the beginning and

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 134

the end lay a vast space punctuated only by the occasional fort or trading post: a space in which significant living was to be done, but for which there was little except
sketchy guidebooks and travelers' tales as patterns. In this unwritten space, journalizing for many was a way of negotiating the experience: even the barest of diaries,
including only mileage and weather, might provide a kind of map, or at least an understandable pattern. The result of such attention to the interim space itself, however,
was to make it signify all out of proportion to the destination. The space of the trail competed with the overarching fantasy of home.
Rebecca Ketcham is one of the most satisfying diarists of the trail, because she wrote copiously not only about the landscape and the schedule of the trail, but also,
and most interestingly, about the personality conflicts that drove people apart. Ketcham was not one of the teachers sent West by the National Board, but her aim
seems to have coincided with the missionary zeal of that organized effort. She had collected donations from friends and relatives to support her trip, an action which
suggests that her trip was considered worthwhile by other people in her community. Her diary offers no clue as to her reasons for undertaking the journey or her plans
for settlement after her arrival. Lillian Schlissel speculates Ketcham may have gone West to escape a soured romance; but this guess, like any other, is unsubstantiated
by the journal (Schlissel 101). Her pious sentiments and firm resolution to continue reflected in her diary, and the record of her eventual teaching occupation in
Oregon, cast her within the general mold of the feminine teacher/activist of the era. After teaching in Clatsop Plains, Oregon for somewhat less than two years,
however, she married an upstanding citizen named Finis E. Mills, a member of the Board of Trustees of the First Presbyterian Society. Within five years after her
marriage, she, Mills, and their two young sons left Oregon for Kentucky, apparently her husband's family home (Ketcham 248).
Ketcham traveled with a small group of people under the authoritarian leadership of William H. Gray, one of the original 1836 missionaries to the Oregon Indians and
a veteran of overland travel. In 1853, Gray was on his third east­west journey across the continent. His prickly and overbearing personality is well­documented in the
diaries of Mary Walker and others who traveled west with him in 1838. 3 Ketcham recorded the general complaints of the 1853 party about his restrictions on food
consumption, baggage weight, and sleeping time. At one point she wrote with horror of Gray's whipping a fifteen­year­old boy for the crime of falling asleep on guard
duty, and the next day with satisfaction noted that Gray himself could scarcely stay awake while driving the team. As a leader, he was opinionated and absolutist, but
his policies were calculated to ensure survival. Indeed, he was an amazing survivor not only of the general hazards of the road such as lack of food and bad water, but
also of Indian attack (he was the sole survivor of a Sioux ambush near Ash Hollow

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 135

on a return trip East in 1837), and of financial ruin, changing occupations several times during his long life. His project that corresponded to Ketcham's trip was the
transport of a large flock of sheep to Oregon. 4 Despite his personality flaws, he was a veteran of the trail and knew how to respond to its rigors. One of Ketcham's
major complaints early on was that he disregarded what she understood to be implicit rules of social behavior, such as protecting women from dangers and inclement
weather.
Perhaps because she perceived herself as part of a powerful social force for good, Ketcham assumed she would receive deferential treatment and that her opinion
would be valuable. Early in her 1853 journal, she frequently reminded herself to follow the example of her Savior, and to remember what it meant to be a Christian,
despite the unending discord around her. The first sign that such a position was not to be hers in Gray's company was his autocratic decision to travel on Sunday
(Ketcham 249). Gray repeatedly disrupted Ketcham's preferred subject position by insisting on a military­style organization for their company (in which she is
decidedly subordinate) instead of recognizing cultural or family patterns that would allow her a more protected role. To her great irritation, Ketcham was required to
cook and clean for the company much more often than she found convenient. Gray refused to make distinctions between people in terms of the amount of work
required, other than assigning men to the animals and women to the care of the camp. She decreased the work she did, however, after finding out that her passage
cost nearly twice as much as that of fellow traveler James Van Renssalaer. She wrote "Charge me one hundred and fifty and then expect me to work my way! I think I
shall find more time to write hereafter" (263). "Working [her] way," apparently, was something Ketcham had not anticipated. The financial transaction of her passage,
in her mind roughly similar to the act of buying a steamboat ticket, should have been over when she paid her fare. The kind of workaday employment Gray demands
was distasteful, for it placed her in the role of servant rather than of paid and protected passenger.
Ketcham's outrage at Gray's dealings with her appeared to be aimed not strictly at gender­based inequality, but rather the idea that she should be dragged out of her
rightful social position and thus denied the protection she felt she deserved. That her ideas about social position were firmly based in her feminine identity became clear
a few days later, when she was left out in the rain during a storm instead of being invited to ride with the other women in the covered carriage. Riding alone when the
rain began, she assumed Gray would stop and let her get into the carriage. Instead, he found her a rubber overcoat, and another woman gave her an old bonnet to
wear so hers would not be ruined. According to Ketcham, she rode in the thunderstorm for two or three hours and through a deep stream that further soaked her
dress until they arrived at a camping place and the rain stopped. In the carriage at last,

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 136

she waited with the others for the ground to dry enough for a fire to be laid and tents to be set up:
So there I sat in the carraige [sic] for more than an hour, my feet and limbs cold as ice, and my face and head like fire. Every time anyone spoke to me I had the greatest difficulty to
keep from crying. If it had really seemed necessary for one to ride, and there had been anyone with me, I could have laughed it off, but to have all the rest riding along in their
carraige, and me taking all that terrible storm alone when there seemed to be not the least necessity for it, I can assure it was a good deal more than I could bear without being very
indignant, and I would not have felt so badly then if Mr. Gray had shown the least disposition to have a fire made and a place for me to change my clothes and be made
comfortable. I was not much afraid of taking cold, but the idea of being treated in so heartless a manner was the main thing. (265)

Alone, ignored, and soaked, Ketcham feels abandoned by the man who, she feels, has contracted to take care of her, and therefore unnecessarily exposed to
dangers. It is important to point out, for the sake of context, that the men in the company regularly got wet in taking care of the sheep and oxen. The rubber coat given
Ketcham during the storm was a man's. For her it was inadequate, and not just because it didn't cover her skirts.
What seemed truly "heartless" to Ketcham is that she felt her womanhood merited more careful treatment. Gray, however, was in service to the exigencies of the
weather, not to social convention. She chose to ignore the practical fact that the ground was too wet to lay a fire or set up a tent, and instead focused on her outrage at
the discomfort to which she is subjected. At home, no doubt, she would have been invited indoors and offered warm clothes while her wet things hung by the fire to
dry. Here on the plains, however, the only "indoors" places available were the transient sleeping tents they bring along; and the availability of those was completely
dependent on the cooperation of the environment. The fire that was the very symbol of hospitality and concern at the heart of the home, could not practically be
kindled. The trail controlled this particular turn in her narrative, yet she attributed the twist to Gray. At this point in Ketcham's journal, Gray came to personify the
dangers placed in her path. Her insistence that he could alter her miserable circumstances if he chose, de­emphasized the role of the weather and the landscape and
assigned control to him. Safe space on the trail, then, depended upon his good graces.
Ketcham thus set up Gray as her protector. His actions in that role, however, were decidedly unsatisfactory. After the ordeal of the rainstorm, Ketcham felt the insult
to her womanhood was compounded by Gray's failure

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 137

to recognize her sacrifice. Her assumptions about the appropriate treatment of women had been challenged, and she began to perceive that she was mistaken about
the social codes that would be operative on the trail. The social differences between men and women at home in New York were simply not recognized in Gray's
company, because he saw no practical purpose in them. The financial inequality revealed by Ketcham's inquiries to James revealed that Gray's attitude with regard to
women was far from worshipful: apparently, he felt ladies were trouble. Far from the reassuring walls of home, Gray was inclined to expose her as much as possible to
the hardships of the outdoors.
Gray's disregard for culturally­defined feminine prerogatives showed itself in his control of such traditionally feminine matters as cooking and nursing. As far as Gray
was concerned, domestic routines and rationales were best left behind for the duration of the journey. He prepared meals himself and restricted portions; and, when
diarrhea or other maladies struck the group, he prescribed and administered remedies. His standard remedy for diarrhea was a diet of stewed fruit and rice; or, in
severe cases, abstention from solid food altogether and a regimen of liquids only. His dictatorial administration of even these helpful cures, however, chafed the
members of his party. In June Ketcham, troubled with constipation, wrote in exasperation:
rice and peaches have been provided for those who had diarhea, and I have eaten of them. I have never before been where I had no choice as to what I could eat, nor the privilege
of saying what I would like. A pretty dear passage across the Rocky Mountains I call it. (280)

For Ketcham, Gray's control over the traditionally feminine arts of food and medicine was much harder to accept than his dictatorship over the more masculine issues
of navigation and care of stock. Her emphasis on her own powerlessness is particularly acute at this point: to have no "choice" or "privilege" in these matters was
particularly galling. Gray's actions actively impinged upon her subject position.
Despite his disregard for the routines of home, William Gray was in fact acting as the head of a family group during this trip: most of the members of the company were
his wife's relatives. The family model, however, clashed disastrously with his management of the group. One of the principal sources of conflict during the trip, and one
that Rebecca Ketcham invoked when she wrote of her disappointment in failing to become part of an harmonious family, was that in spite of Gray's militaristic
discipline, people in the group tended to follow pre­existing family habits rather than accept new rules. Camilla Dix, for example, the spinster sister, was forever doing
younger sister Martha Godley's work; the Godley boys were pampered by their mother, and the

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 138

matriarch Sarah Dix was accustomed to unquestioned authority on matters of health and cooking. Gray, however, was in the business of moving people and stock
across the continent as quickly and as safely as possible, and he had no patience with those who shirked what he defined as obligation or who objected to policies he
understood as necessary. He readily whipped his fifteen­year­old nephew, Henry Godley, for falling asleep on duty. Family feelings were irrelevant beside the
demands of the road. Ketcham writes that she was disappointed in the rapport of the company: "I had expected we would all cling together and to be one family, but
we are anything else. I presume I shall have some heartache after I get there, before I get settled" (266). "Family" and "settled" at mid­journey were words that still
inhabited the preconceived narrative of her trip; but at this juncture she perceived that the story was becoming more complicated than she expected. Significantly,
however, settlement, coterminous with happiness, was yet the implied end.
In order to make that end possible, Ketcham suspended her own judgment about Gray's behavior. She excused his abuses of power by citing the different space of
the trail, no longer blaming him for the vicissitudes of the weather, but rather assigning him a mediating role between the dangerous transitional space of the road and
the safety represented by home and hearth. The "heartache" brought on by his autocratic authority and the subsequent disintegration of the "family" on the road would,
in her mind, be restored after the ordeal of the passage was behind her. Even William Gray, she considered, might be different within his own home. She resolved to
suspend judgment on Gray's behavior until the space of the journey was done, and recognizable frameworks of home reestablished:
I believe it will not do to judge of character on this journey as one would anywhere else. The incidents or circumstances here develop character as nothing else can, and if
allowances are not made, we cannot come to correct decisions. At all events, I don't think I can understand Mr. Gray till I see him at home. (271)

In trying to understand Gray's seemingly inappropriate behavior, Ketcham reasoned that the rules of conduct were not the same as "at home." This suspension of
judgment is an important conjunction between the narrative of expectation and the narrative of the road in her journal, for it marked the place from which she loosened
her own control on the imaginative shaping of events, and began to rely almost entirely on Gray's mediation of her experience.
As Ketcham's diary progressed, it revealed a growing alliance with Gray and his authority. Indeed, the narrative began to depend on his actions rather than hers:
Ketcham became a commentator on Gray's actions rather than the

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 139

recorder of her own emotions. Near the end of the trip, she even admitted that she favored Gray over the seemingly more congenial men and women in the party: "I
do not know why it is I always feel inclined to side with men like him against everyone else. Still I believe my judgment tells me he is far from being the only one in the
fault in the difficulty they have had" (352). She began to see other members of the company as disrupters of the codes laid down by Gray, instead of the other way
round. Gray, as the arbiter of the narrative imposed by the journey, took precedence over the increasingly inappropriate actors still preoccupied with maintaining the
standards of Ithaca. Despite the hardships he imposed in terms of food and rest, Ketcham reassured herself in her journal that he must have had reasons for his
behavior. After one river crossing where the sheep were nearly beyond control, she wrote: "I am sorry for the man anyway. He has a terrible temper to control, and
with so much care on his mind, so much to irritate and vex him, I don't wonder he acts like a crazy man" (375). Without admitting it, Ketcham transformed Gray in her
diary from a "crazy man," one whose actions are inappropriate, to a man whose behavior is at least understandable.
In her journal, this suspension of judgment and dependence upon Gray as arbiter of the road extended from personality even to features of the landscape. Everything
she previously knew and understood almost instinctively became suspect. She wrote with surprise about the deceptive nature of the landscape for Ithaca­trained eyes.
Height, distance, even expectations of weather patterns were not to be trusted. Camped on the Platte River, she wrote: "It is surprising to see how easily one is
deceived in the distance here on these plains, and in size of objects. I have a great many times mistaken a crow some distance before us for a man" (279). This illusion
of perspective, commonly reported by overland emigrants, was paralleled in Ketcham's writing by a certain disjunction of expectations. Her account of Fort Kearney,
for example, exposed the vast difference between her idea of what a fort looked like and the way this one presented itself: "We saw no mounted guns, nor in reality
anything that looked like a fort except the dress of those we saw about" (274). Gray was also of the opinion that Fort Kearney fell far short of its name. Ketcham
recorded that he commented that it looked like "the commanding officer liked strong drink better than anything else" (274). In other situations, Ketcham's tentative
views of the environment gave way to those of the trailhardened Gray. About Independence Rock, a landmark near the Platte on which emigrants traditionally carved
their names and dates, she wrote:
It is said to cover an area of 5 acres. I [think] that is correct, but that it is four hundred feet high I doubt very much. Of course we cannot judge of distances nor heights as we
could at home, but thinking steadily of what we

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 140
have passed, and comparing this with the other given heights, I doubt it very much. (348)

The qualifiers she added to the statement undermined her empirical defense of her opinion. The superfluous repetition of "I doubt ... very much" especially neutralized
her initial tone of confidence. Similar hesitations dogged her descriptions of other parts of the landscape. Describing the landscape around Independence Rock earlier
in the paragraph, she repeated the word "seem" three times in rapid succession, as if her view of things were at best a hazy and ill­remembered recollection of a dream:
We seemed to be in a large prairie, ... with great mountains of rocks seemingly thrown up from the earth. ... As we passed around the ends of them, we could see all around. They
appeared strangely enough to me. These chains of mountains seemed to be on every side of us, and we could see no way of getting out of the valley. ... (348)

William Gray, of course, was her guide out of the valley, and he did not seem to be lost or confused for a moment. Over the course of the journey, she became a keen
listener to him as he drove the carriage, noting that she was learning much from him about driving the team, identifying flora and fauna, understanding Indian behavior,
and even about writing in a journal. With her acceptance of a distinction between home and trail, she seemed also to have accepted Gray as an authority.
Near the end of the journey, she had learned so well to disregard her own instincts that she occasionally defied common sense. For example, despite nothing that "If
we had been at home [we] would have expected rain" (383), she made no preparations for the wetting that followed within a few minutes. This time, she and the other
women, who had been preparing to dry clothes (!), climbed into the carriage and waited out the rain, which shortly "began to come down in large drops" (383). In the
context of her changed frame of reference, the rain was a surprise, proof not that her Eastern sensibilities were right, but rather evidence of the unpredictability of
Western weather. This episode, although recorded without commentary in her diary, served to underline her complete subjection to Gray. She assumed that her own
opinion, even about domestic routines learned at home in New York, was valueless. Lack of confidence in her own powers of discernment seemed to undermine
Ketcham's ability to take care of herself. In order to take advantage of Gray's protective powers, she had to give up the self­sufficient attitude that led her to make the
trip as a single woman in the first place.
Perhaps because of the fact that she placed herself at the mercy of forces outside her control, Ketcham's diary revealed no sense of personal insecurity.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 141

She felt so confident in Gray's skill and judgment, in fact, that the occasional skittishness of the other women irritated her. For example, when the elderly Mrs. Dix
requested permission to avoid a dangerous river crossing with the wagons and ride instead as a passenger on the ferry, Gray became angry and this time Ketcham,
surprisingly, was on his side: "Mr. Gray did not like it at all that the request was made. He likes to have us have confidence in him and let him manage his own affairs
without a word of interference, and I think it would be very much for the happiness of this company if Mrs. Dix and Mrs. Godley would cease to interfere as they
do" (357). In contrast to her earlier outrage about the stony treatment she received in the rainstorm, Ketcham was surprisingly complicit in Gray's refusal to make
allowances for age and gender. Mrs. Dix's request showed a preference for protection from the elements and for organized public transport (a shadow of the social
structures they had left behind) over the exposure to wild water Gray's plan offered. Such a preference seemed entirely reasonable for an elderly lady, accustomed to
social conveniences. Her request, however, revealed Mrs. Dix had not relinquished the life of the home for the life of the trail, and that revelation enabled Ketcham to
feel superior. She had realigned herself completely, from representative of Eastern manners to virtual deputy of frontier behavior. The "heartache" she expected to
suffer through seemed to have dulled as her expectations were deferred.
Just as her own sense of loss had lost its sting, the griefs of others in Ketcham's journal were subject to a William Gray­styled reduction. Like many other emigrants,
she counted graves when they appeared by the roadside, 5 but she did not record very many (a surprising lack only one year after the cholera epidemics on the trail in
1851 and 1852); and those she did write about she suspected of merely appearing to be graves:
Before this morning we had seen five graves; today we have seen four, making nine. Mr. Gray said some person who was considered reliable had made a statement which was
published for a fact in regard to the graves seen on this route, which we account for in this way. (The number was very great—I forget what it was, and beside, he said what was
singular, no grass grew on these graves.) We have noticed all along long, narrow holes in the ground which look like a grave sunken in. But as we leave such an one wherever we
camp, we take it for granted those we see are made in the same way. Indeed, we are sure of it from the signs around. They take a spade and dig such a hole to make a fire in. ...
when it rains upon the ashes we leave, an alkali is formed which prevents the grass from growing upon them. (269)

Ketcham's phrasing here tells a great deal about her increasing separation from Easterners and growing allegiance to Gray's frame of reference. Her qualifications

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 142

of the report ("considered reliable" and "published for a fact") served to underline the naivete of the Eastern readers who took such reports at face value. The
sentimental horror of thousands of graves lining the route became for her a picture drawn by overinspired writers for a gullible public. Her own sketch of the
experience was drawn by William Gray. That Ketcham repeated his explanation of the apparent "graves" in her journal not only eliminated the possibility for her own
emotional response, but also implied an emerging gulf between the Gray­Ketcham unit and the imaginary mass of uninitiated Easterners. At this point in the journal, the
twin focus on the home behind and destination beyond blurred: far from wishing herself at the end of her wanderings, Ketcham lamented the haste at which the group
traveled and stated her desire to return someday to better enjoy the scenery. The geographical expanse that for her was originally merely a space of transition had
become a place with its own logic and its own particular meanings.
That logic and meaning, however, depended entirely on Gray's interpretation. From the beginning of her journal to the end, Ketcham's outlook changed from that of an
independent woman out to fulfill a cultural mandate to that of a follower whose own subjectivity depended upon the authority of her captain. His abrupt departure near
the Columbia River when the party was still weeks from their destination, then, left her bewildered and afraid. Although the most significant dangers of the passage
were behind them, Gray's abandonment seemed to Ketcham to be inexcusable. In her journal she complained:
Mr. Gray was very much tried, but I cannot think he did quite right in leaving us as he has. I felt badly enough when he went away. ... I have not felt so much anxiety and dread on
the whole trip as I do now; feel so entirely unprotected. (400)

At this point on the trail, the only significant geographical hazard left was the passage down the Columbia, a venture handled by ferryman entrepreneurs on the river
itself. Local Indians were interested in trade, not attack. Yet, the departure of William Gray stripped her of the sense of security her dependence on his judgment
allowed. Her feeling of exposure at this point seemed to arise from the disjunction between her trail­adjusted point of view and her renewed need, near her long­
planned destination, to recover meaningful social structures. Having ceased to regard the trip as white space to be endured between the meaningful loci of Eastern
home and Destination West, she had begun to recognize significance in the landscape itself. Without Gray as her interpreter of that landscape, she was suddenly
without referent in an unfamiliar syntax. The geographical isolation she enjoyed and wished to linger within just a few pages earlier became not only a threat, but a
barrier to the reassumption of her accustomed position within a social grammar.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 143

Without a secure social or geographical place, Ketcham seemed also to have lost her ability to find a safe subject position from which to write. Shortly after Gray's
departure, but before the end of her journey, the entries in her diary ceased. Her angry and self­assured ''I shall find more time to write hereafter" at the beginning of
the trip (263), a statement which made the act of writing a defense against the unwelcome space created by Gray, belonged to a completely different writer. The
Rebecca Ketcham writing, or not writing, at the end was not powerful enough to erect those kinds of defenses. The pages she was so determined to fill at the
beginning of her journey despite Gray's demand on her time were left blank at the end of her book, before the end of the trail. The frameworks of home still unbuilt,
she dropped her narrative altogether. The ending of her journal, forecast from the very beginning as the reestablishment of familiar structures and values, was unwritten.
Her foreshadowed observations of William Gray at home came to nothing, and her dreamt­of success as a teacher and bringer of civilization in the frontier regions of
Oregon went unrecorded. The alien space of the trail bound her so effectively to authority other than her own that, when she found herself unprotected in that space,
her own ability to muster authorial power ended. She left her written self as Gray left her: on the road.
Rebecca Ketcham's slide from self­sufficient, confident young teacher to fearful emigrant follows a delicate border between protection and exposure. The conflict
between the need for group security against dangers in the landscape and the desire for individual protection against ambiguities in the social sphere engendered
difficulties for emigrants, especially for women, who by mid­century presided over the cultural sanctuary of the home. Although Ketcham suspended judgment about
human behavior on the trail and thus was able to fit into the military­style order Gray demanded, she planned to teach in Oregon when she arrived, to help reconstruct
the stable social framework that gave special power to her feminine position. The process of her movement through the alien space of the trail, however, changed her
options. What she had assumed to be the trivial space of the journey imprinted itself on her writing in a way that made the completion of her story impossible. Like the
furniture jettisoned from wagons and left to bleach in the sun, the fantasy of domesticity was at once fragile and difficult to move. Forced to condense both physical
and intangible components of home into the most basic elements, emigrants sometimes found their dreams of home replaced by an unending sense of uprootedness.
Notes
1. For the most extensive literary analysis of pioneer women's narratives, see Annette Kolodny, The Land Before Her (Chapel Hill: The University of North Carolina

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 144

Press, 1984). Lillian Schlissel's historical collection, Women's Diaries of the Westward Journey (New York: Schocken Books, 1982), is now a classic. Other
studies include Julie Roy Jeffrey, Frontier Women (New York: Hill and Wang, 1979); Sandra L. Myres, Westering Women and the Frontier Experience 1800–
1915 (Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1982); and Susan Armitage and Elizabeth Jameson, eds. The Women's West (Norman, Oklahoma: University
of Oklahoma Press, 1987).
2. 38 (April 1849): 294. For information about women teachers in the West, see Polly Kaufman, Women Teachers on the Frontier (New Haven: Yale University
Press, 1984). Godey's Lady's Book addresses the subject of women teachers in two issues: April, 1849: 294–295 and May, 1850: 354–355.
3. See Clifford Drury, First White Women over the Rockies 3 vols. (Glendale, CA: Arthur H. Clark, 1963). Mary Walker's diary is reproduced in vol. 2.
4. The movement of the sheep was a frustrating project that nevertheless succeeded until the very end of the journey, when Gray was tying up the boat containing the
animals at the mouth of the Columbia River. A sudden storm pulled the boat back out into the waves and capsized it, drowning the entire flock. He had mortgaged his
farm to buy them. See Ketcham 240–245.
5. Lillian Schlissel calls women emigrants in particular "actuaries of the road" for the prevalence of running totals in their journals. For more on this diaristic
phenomenon, see Schlissel, Women's Diaries of the Westward Journey, 15.
References
Anderson, Benedict. Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and Spread of Nationalism. London: Verso, 1983.
Beecher, Catharine and Harriet Beecher Stowe. The American Woman's Home, or, Principles of Domestic Science. 1869; rpt. Hartford, Connecticut: The
Stowe­Day Foundation, 1991.
Bercovitch, Sacvan. The American Jeremiad. Madison: University of Wisonsin Press, 1978.
Bushman, Richard L. The Refinement of America. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1992.
Butor, Michel. "Travel and Writing." Mosaic 8:1 (Fall 1976): 1–16.
Child, Lydia Maria. The Mother's Book. 1831; rpt. Old Saybrook, Connecticut: The Globe Pequot Press, 1992.
Drury, Clifford M. First White Women over the Rockies. 3 vols. Glendale, CA: Arthur H. Clark, 1963.
Faragher, John Mack. Women and Men on the Overland Trail. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1979.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 145

Hale, Sarah Josepha. "Editor's Page." Godey's Lady's Book. April 1849: 294–295 and May, 1850: 354–355.
Kaufman, Polly Welts. Women Teachers on the Frontier. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1984.
Ketcham, Rebecca. "From Ithaca to Clatsop Plains: Miss Ketcham's Journal of Travel." Eds. Leo M. Kaiser and Priscilla Knuth. Oregon Historical Quarterly 42
(1961): 237–87, 337–402.
Kolodny, Annette. The Land Before Her: Fantasy and Experience of the American Frontiers, 1630–1860. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press,
1984.
Schlissel, Lillian. Women's Diaries of the Westward Journey. New York: Schocken Books, 1982.
Stowe, Harriet Beecher. House and Home Papers. Boston: Ticknor & Fields, 1865.
Unruh, John D., Jr. The Plains Across: The Overland Emigrants and the Trans­Mississippi West, 1840–1860. Chicago: University of Illinois Press, 1979.
Urry, John. The Tourist Gaze: Leisure and Travel in Contemporary Societies. London and Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications, 1990.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 147

Safe Space and Storytelling: Willa Cather's Shadows on the Rock
Linda K. Karell
The tension between the desire for home, for synchrony, for sameness, and the realization of the repressions and violence that make home, harmony, sameness imaginable, and that
enforce it, is made clear in the movement of the narrative by very careful and effective reversals which do not erase the positive desire for unity, for Oneness, but destabilize and
undercut it.
—Biddy Martin and Chandra Talpade Mohanty

The above epigraph is drawn from Biddy Martin and Chandra Talpade Mohanty's essay, "Feminist Politics: What's Home Got to Do With It?" 1 In that now well­
known essay, Martin and Mohanty examine Minnie Bruce Pratt's autobiographical narrative, "Identity: Skin Blood Heart," in order to theorize ''the power and appeal
of 'home'" (191). Martin and Mohanty's essay investigates how the desire for "home" and its subsequent constructions within the various communities inhabited by
Pratt always exist in tense relationship, buttressed by the illusion of safely demarcated spaces, and contested by the realization that others' stories must be violently
suppressed in order to maintain that illusion. Throughout their essay, Martin and Mohanty question the desirability of "home" in relation to feminist and lesbian feminist
theory and as a component of Pratt's narrative itself. Defining what they mean by "home," Martin and Mohanty argue that
"Being home" refers to the place where one lives within familiar, safe, protected boundaries; "not being home" is a matter of realizing that home was an illusion of coherence and
safety based on the exclusion of specific histories of oppression and resistance, the repression of differences even within oneself. (196)

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 148

The relationships between concepts of "home," "safe space," and "storytelling" are multiple, but for the purposes of this essay, I want to suggest that safe spaces,
whatever their form, designate "home." In other words, to be ''home" or to be "at home" always connotes a form of safe space. That space may be material, such as
the house in which one grew up and felt secure, or it may be psychological, such as a particularly familiar or comfortable pattern of emotional responses. For women,
however, the physical and psychological safe spaces that resonate as "homes" have often been linked to women's bodily, sexual, or artistic containment and violation
within those structures. In my reading, the critical challenge of Martin and Mohanty's analysis is its insistence that "home" relies upon the relentless exclusion of
difference for its maintenance. As Martin and Mohanty implicitly argue by their use of Pratt's autobiographical narrative as an example of their insights, the stories
women tell about their lives can disrupt a belief that the safe spaces of home can be had without a concomitant cost to the women who inhabit them or, for that matter,
to those others excluded from those homes. Without denying the psychological necessity, the "positive desire," for safe space, unheard or unacknowledged stories
hold the potential to undermine and sometimes even shatter "home's" claims to security and protection from difference. For women, then, it is important to consider the
wide­ranging implications of what we call safe space. Is safe space desirable? Is it even possible and, if so, under what circumstances? In this chapter I argue that
constructions of "home"—and thus of safe space—are invariably tenuous; they are often desired for their promise of safety, but they are simultaneously always
vulnerable to disruption. Desire for a safe space to call home that is coupled with a realization that home is vulnerable and tenuous is the central tension in Willa
Cather's 1931 novel, Shadows on the Rock, and it is through Cather's use of storytelling that we witness the disruption of safe space. As critics have already noted,
there are a range of stories within the pages of Shadows on the Rock: legends of historical saints and pioneers, tales of warring Indians and devout religious explorers,
and recounted memories of historical figures all interweave with the narrative of the daily comings and goings of the Canadian settlers. Susan Rosowski stresses
storytelling's unifying and universalizing potential when she argues that each character in Shadows on the Rock "participates in rituals of storytelling, by which individual
lives are joined to timeless legends" (179). But in Shadows on the Rock, seldom do any two characters tell the same story. The discrepancies between stories
steadfastly resist a single coherent reading; stories contradict each other and simultaneously work to question the very assurance of home they are called upon to
create. The stories in Shadows on the Rock, their content and the manner in which they are told, enact the novel's internal debate between the liberating potential of
safe spaces that signify "home," and the threats of women's socialization, erasure, and silence that structure those homes.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 149

Moreover, in Shadows on the Rock, race as well as gender impact which stories can be told and by whom, and whose stories will be believed. In fact, Cather's
insistence on the importance of the position from which one speaks in this novel foregrounds differences from the universal and insists upon the impossibility of stability.
Cather mounts her largest investigation of universality with her examination of religious space as a potentially safe space for women. Here too, however, while the
text's representations of religious spaces reveal an obsession with coherence and stability, the contradictions between those representations simultaneously force the
reader, through the characters' storytelling and through the content of the stories they tell, to acknowledge that coherence and stability may come at a cost to women
and are highly tenuous. What is up for grabs in Shadows on the Rock, in other words, is the possibility and the desire(ability) of an uncontested, universally human
story.
In addition to the resonance that the metaphor of home has for my reading of the many layers of Shadows on the Rock—the surface text, the subtext, the multiple and
often contradicting stories—the safety promised by a stable home is apparent in Cather's writing process and in the novel's reception. In other words, the desire for
safe space figures in specific ways in Cather's attempts to control interpretations of her life as well as in the reputation for being a marginally canonical writer that has
stuck to Cather relentlessly through the years. Written when Cather was fifty­eight years old and nearer to the end of her career than to its beginning, Shadows on the
Rock, like the rest of her late fiction, has been consistently considered inferior to her early novels. In fact, to the degree that Cather is valued as a canonical writer, she
is valued for a reductive selection of work, one that emphasizes her earlier pioneer novels. Interpretations of her work based on these novels frequently judge Cather's
art to be most significant when most readily digestible as a universal story. In Cather, Canon, and the Politics of Reading (1992), Deborah Carlin argues that "What
designates [her] early novels as canonical then is their appeal to reading publics as stories already inscribed within the national imagination. ... What is identifiably
canonical within Cather's nearly fifty years of fiction writing then is, paradoxically, a small number of texts that embody the expansive West of the American
imagination" (7–8). Certainly the reason for this truncated critical assessment is not a lack of range on Cather's part. Throughout her writing career, which spanned the
length of her adult life, Cather wrote prolifically and diversely. Her writing covers a wide range of subjects, and she experimented with dramatically different
composing processes and literary styles. But the novels that have secured Cather's literary reputation, O Pioneers!, My Antonia, and Death Comes for the
Archbishop, for example, have often been read as transcendently "human" stories that resonate across time. Shadows on the Rock shatters this promise of a
familiar—and consoling—story of nation­building.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 150

Working on behalf of the universal, critics have praised Cather as an intuitive artist, one who possesses a "naturalness so great that one is tempted to think of her
almost as not a writer at all," since this naturalness "lies far below the surface of conscious endeavor" (Tennant ix). As feminist scholarship has shown, however,
crediting a female author with intuitive greatness at the expense of rationality satisfies cultural expectations about what and how a woman should write and effectively
bars her from creative agency: not masters themselves, women are mastered by their intuition, which proves more capable than their intellects. At the risk of belaboring
what I hope is the obvious, even a quick skim through Cather's early non­fiction writing will severely tax any reading of her as solely an intuitive writer, rather than as
one who is consciously directing (if not fully in conscious control of) her writing energies and abilities. Scores of her articles, entertainment and literature reviews, and
cultural commentaries reveal a young woman very much engaged with the cultural questions of her time and carefully and deliberately defining for herself the potential
of art and the role of the female artist. 2
Gendered expectations for women's writing in America have allowed critics to construct a Cather whose literary works uphold interpretations of America's colonizing
history as justified, even divinely ordained. Cather's focus on Westward expansionism through her positive representation of the pioneer, especially of the pioneer
woman, her frequent emphasis on landscape and on what has been interpreted as "the archetypal and eternally human," as well as "that effortless symbolic quality that
is Cather's distinctive note" (Rose 132, 128), mesh well with historical renderings of America's past as the discovery and morally sanctioned occupation of a "new"
land. In contrast to her contemporary Gertrude Stein's radical linguistic experimentation, for instance, the placid surface of Cather's novels, her focus on exteriority
rather than interiority, her insistence on precise word choice, on traditional grammar and syntactical structure in order to render meaning exactly, have all been invoked
to uphold critical readings of Cather as conservative and apolitical. Although Cather has sometimes been dismissed as simplistic, naive, or escapist in the literary
celebration of Modernism's self­conscious complexity, many critics who argue for Cather's ''greatness" agree that she is able to achieve anonymity, thus transcending
gender, race, and class.3 Cather's writing has been judged most aesthetically pleasing when least politically disruptive, helping to create what Carlin describes as "the
early critical formula that Cather's novels climax in the twenties, then spiral downward in a trajectory of despair, decline, and artistic degeneration" (16). The critical
silence that envelops Shadows on the Rock consistently avoids confronting a Cather who is more politically engaged than most readings of her earlier novels suggest.
We can see this engagement in her essay, "On Shadows on the Rock," where Cather was openly skeptical of the desire for ceaseless stability that so structures her
novel: "There another age

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 151

persists. There ... I caught something new to me; a kind of feeling about life and human fate that I could not accept, wholly, but which I could not but admire" (15).
Her description is evenhanded, suggesting that the premise of stability that permeates her novel was not only "new" to her, but also somewhat unconvincing. While we
need not read Cather's retrospective statement of her intentions as fixing the meaning of her text, her statement intervenes in the conflation of author and text that
upholds readings of Cather as either transcendent or naive, and it shows her to be quite able to tolerate, even to admire, ambiguity.
Shadows on the Rock is plotted to create the "illusion of coherence" (Martin and Mohanty 180). The novel's structure of repetition emphasizes stability: set during
1697–1698 in French Quebec, Canada, Shadows on the Rock spans one year of twelve­year­old Cécile Auclair's life. The seasonal arrival of ships carrying the
supplies from France necessary for survival is a comforting repetition, as are the characters' daily rituals of labor, religious observation, food preparation, and
storytelling. However, the atmosphere of certainty that predictable events and cyclical time generate within the text is almost immediately suspect, when challenges to
the possibility of stability erupt. The rock upon which Quebec is built is equally a symbol of stability and a reminder of vulnerability. Buffeted by "the ever­changing
northern light and weather," Quebec is bounded by a forest which keeps difference—and the terrors it is believed to contain—perpetually within view:
[O]n the West, behind the town [of Quebec], the forest stretched no living man knew how far. That was the dead, sealed world of the vegetable kingdom, an uncharted continent
choked with interlocking trees, living, dead, half­dead, their roots in bogs and swamps, strangling each other in a slow agony that had lasted for centuries. The forest was
suffocation, annihilation; there European man was quickly swallowed up in silence, distance, mould, black mud, and the stinging swarms of insect life that bred in it. ... The river
was the one thing that lived, moved, glittered, changed,—a highway along which man could travel, taste the sun and open air, feel freedom, join their fellows, reach the open sea ...
the world, even! (6–7)

Representing the forest as living terror may be consonant with historical perceptions of the vast unknown North American continent at this period of colonization, but
something in addition to the quest for psychological or historical realism is also registered here. In a text that so relentlessly insists on the need for a stability possible
only through the absence of change, this description of the forested landscape of Quebec posits exactly the opposite: changelessness is terrifying stagnation, while the
movement of the river offers life because it changes. Even at this early point in the novel, with her description of Quebec's forest,

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 152

Cather contradicts her characters' desires for a secure place to call home and begins crafting a rich subtext that will continue throughout the novel.
An equally disruptive element of that subtext is the racial difference that poses a threat to the colonists' new home in Quebec. Cather's description of the forest is a
New World nightmare filled with repulsion and dread. It is also a screen onto which fears of racial difference are projected as a chaos that threatens to annihilate the
French settlers. Besides breeding insects—or perhaps, the paragraph suggests, as an example of them—the forest is home for Native peoples. Unlike her
representations of Native Americans in Death Comes for the Archbishop, in Shadows on the Rock Cather deploys predictable stereotypes and records a historical
prejudice. For example, Cécile "liked to think of things of their own in Canada," and some of the stories that fascinate her are about the "wonderful" and "terrible"
"tortures the Jesuit missionaries endured at the hands of the Iroquois, in those savage, interminable forests" (101, 102). Although Cather's emphasis is on Cécile's
adolescent romanticization of suffering (Cécile's father, for instance, wonders ''whether there has not been a good deal of misplaced heroism in the Canadian
missions,—a waste of rare qualities which did nobody any good" [155]), Cécile's romanticization of the missionaries' tribulations requires the opposition of a savage
tribe of Indians. During his visit with Cécile and her father, one of the novel's contemporary male religious figures, Father Hector, also portrays the Indians as entirely
alien and malicious in his story of another male religious leader's encounters with the Hurons: "Everything about the savages and their mode of life was utterly repulsive
and horrible to him; their filth, their indecency, their cruelty" (151). Throughout Shadows on the Rock, Native people are generally savages, occasionally cannibals
and, like children, are blissfully unaware of their uncivilized ways, requiring the salvation of the Jesuit priests. In the above passage, Cather projects this paralyzing fear
of racial difference onto the forest, and she records the European desire to contain otherness elsewhere in order to maintain safe—white—homes.
For a transplanted white European community, the racial difference represented by the Indians in Shadows on the Rock is a constant threat to the colonizing project
and the European definitions of home that the novel privileges. For Cécile's mother, Madame Auclair, the Indians are the chaos her homemaking is aimed at excluding:
"Without order our lives would be disgusting, like those of the poor savages. At home, in France, we have learned to do all these things in the best way, and we are
conscientious, and that is why we are called the most civilized people in Europe..." (24). The home Madame attempts to leave Cécile as her legacy is comprised of
innumerable acts of ritualistic ordering designed to "make the new life [in Quebec] as much as possible like the old [life in France]" (23). From the start, however, the
unity of their home is undone as we see these characters' homes built upon the denied or devalued homes of others: despite the unceasing ordering that is

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 153

Cécile's maternal inheritance, the presence of the Native peoples and the forest that is their home remain as mute stereotypes in a text that can neither fully suppress
nor completely acknowledge their presence. That presence of a hostile and alien culture is constructed as an attempt to justify Madame and Cécile's domestic ordering
even as it condemns their efforts to failure.
If the domestic sphere fails to provide women with safe space, then what about the spiritual sphere? Cather gives her fullest treatment of the contradictions created by
conflicting stories and their implications for safe space for women, in her representation of Jeanne Le Ber, the intensely ambiguous female religious figure at the center
of the text. Le Ber is the character through whom Cather explores the potential of religious spaces to offer safe homes to women. Le Ber is a nexus of competing
stories, a series of contradicting interpretations; her "meaning" depends upon who is telling the story, to whom, and where. Le Ber first enters the text as a legend when
Cécile, who is repeatedly transfixed by romanticized stories of female religious figures, reviews the "whole story" in her mind (130). The public story currently
circulating throughout Quebec tells of a recent visit to Le Ber by angels who fix her broken spinning wheel. This story renders Le Ber miraculous and mysterious—a
spiritual authority as suspect as it is liberating for women. It is significant that, despite appearances, Le Ber does not speak for herself. Initially, the words ascribed to
Le Ber are part of Cécile's memory of the legend of Le Ber, prompted by the recent news of the angels' visit. Later, Pierre Charron reports Le Ber's words, along
with his interpretation of their meaning, in the stories he tells about her to Cécile's father.
At seventeen, as the legend Cécile reviews goes, Le Ber imitates the domestic retreat of the medieval mystic, Catherine of Siena, isolating herself in her father's house,
speaking only to a personal attendant. At the end of ten years of religious seclusion, Le Ber uses her dowry to have a three­tiered cell built behind the church's high
altar where she continues to live in isolation, embroidering altar cloths, knitting for the poor, and steadfastly observing her religious convictions. In Felicitous Space,
Judith Fryer claims Le Ber's three­tiered cell is a literary example of "the female discovery of felicitous space" (50), and the public legend Cécile lovingly reviews
includes Le Ber's ecstatic description of that space: "[M]y room is my terrestrial paradise; it is my center; it is my element. There is not any place more delightful, or
more nourishing for me, not any castle, not any palace, which is more agreeable to me. I prefer my cell over the rest of the universe" [my translation] (136). The earthly
paradise Le Ber creates specifically excludes heterosexual marriage and motherhood. If we recall Martin and Mohanty's theory of "home," we see that with Le Ber,
Cather excludes precisely those institutions which traditionally structure domestic homes for women, and which will entirely define Cécile's eventual home with Pierre
Charron, Le Ber's girlhood suitor. In this instance,

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 154

the exclusion of "specific histories of oppression" (Martin and Mohanty 196) is a force of resistance, a method of struggle that can redefine home as a site of potential
liberation for women. Yet, whether or not we agree that Le Ber's space is felicitous, she gains it by intensifying precisely the domestic space she rejects in order to
establish her new home. In other words, Le Ber embraces metaphorically those institutions she rejects physically: she is still quite literally "within her own chamber
within her father's house" (132).
Although the religious space Le Ber occupies replicates in many aspects the domestic space she rejects, her isolation becomes a focus for the novel's investigation of
the consequences for women of female resistance through religious devotion. Le Ber's retreat is founded on female isolation, which the novel represents simultaneously
as Le Ber's "entombment" and as the cause for public "conversation and wonder" (134). As the story describing how Le Ber's spinning wheel was repaired "was told
and retold with loving exaggeration," it becomes an "incomparable gift":
The people have loved miracles for so many hundred years, not as proof or evidence, but because they are the actual flowering of desire. In them vague worship and devotion of
the simple­hearted assumes a form. From being a shapeless longing, it becomes a beautiful image; a dumb rapture becomes a melody that can be remembered and repeated; and the
experience of a moment, which might have been a lost ecstasy, is made into an actual possession and can be bequeathed to another. (137)

Judith Fryer discusses this paragraph as "a description of the process of writing" and describes Jeanne Le Ber as a legend (330–331). This rhetorically elusive
paragraph, much as Le Ber herself is elusive, can certainly be a description of writing, but it also describes storytelling and its rewards. And like stories, the
paragraph's meaning exceeds even these interpretations, transforming and taking up other meanings. "Flowering of desire" is at once desire's culmination, and the
blossoming forth of more intense desire. Desire for a stable form infuses the stories of Le Ber, prompting their retellings, creating the miracle that is the story. Cather
may want a stable form for her narrative authority, but her desire for a spiritual home that will produce permanence in the stories she tells is undone by precisely the
desire motivating the stories. The "actual possession" is inherently unstable because while bequeathable in retellings, it will also change with the inevitable revisions and
exaggerations of retellings. The image and the melody signify longing and rapture transformed by desire, but simultaneously represent their loss, the desire for their
return, and the impossibility of their fulfillment as "an actual possession."
With the public legend of Le Ber, Cather reiterates the familiar apotheosis of woman into worshipped icon. The legend of Le Ber seems to posit religious

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 155

space as a site of authentic power for women, one outside the prescribed heterosexual marketplace. Yet a closer examination of the legend, coupled with Charron's
stories, counters that possibility with increasing ambivalence. Filtered through Cécile's perspective, the public legend of Le Ber emphasizes her mystery as well as her
resistance to an expected trajectory of development that would end in marriage to Pierre Charron. Her mystery depends upon her elusiveness, and her resistance has
required it. Succeeding stories about Le Ber, told from rejected suitor Charron's perspective, present the female recluse as a failed woman in a religious exile of
despair. His stories about her deemphasize her mysteriousness and undercut the possibility of conscious agency, pointing instead to female socialization as the source
of her devotion: "If the venerable Bourgeoys [sic] had not got hold of that girl in her childhood and overstrained her with fasts and penances, she would be a happy
mother today, not sleeping in a stone cell like a prisoner" (177). Ultimately Cather resists final authority over Le Ber's meaning; the reader must sift through
contradictory stories to determine Le Ber's status in the text. In this way, Cather cautions against claims of religious authority or transcendence as methods of defining
autonomous subject positions for women.
In fact, whoever the teller is, the stories told about Le Ber show her performing, with alternating success and failure, depending upon the gendered expectations of the
storyteller, an expected femininity, one assumed by the characters to be knowable and stable. Her performances, when filtered through her storytellers' expectations,
shape the dramatically contradictory interpretations of her. That gender does indeed play a substantial role in interpretation is evident when Cather shows that Le Ber's
public performances of femininity were successful during her rare public appearances in church. The spectacle of Le Ber generates public fascination and approval,
and "On such occasions people used to come in from the neighboring parishes for a glimpse of that slender figure, the richest heiress in Canada, clad in grey serge,
kneeling on the floor near the altar, while her family, in furs and velvet, sat in chairs in another part of the church" (133). However, if Le Ber is able to resist cultural
pressure to accommodate conventional female subject positions, she is nonetheless constrained by those subject positions. The novel stresses that the public legend of
Le Ber not only privileges but eroticizes her self­denial, her isolation, and her intense physical discomfort: "On bitter nights many a kind soul ... lay awake for a little,
listening to the roar of the storm, and wondered how it was with the recluse, under her single coverlid" (135).
That such piety is interpreted as authentic only when enacted by a woman is suggested by Cather's opposing representation of a male religious, Bishop Saint­Vallier.
Saint­Vallier is described as "a man of contradictions," and Euclid Auclair's patron, the Count, describes him as "an actor" (121). Like Le Ber, Saint­Vallier similarly
garbs himself in the severest dress, but his actions are

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 156

interpreted as "lacking in good taste," with a "piety too conspicuous. ... He had a hundred ways of making himself stand out from the throng, and his exceptional piety
was like a reproach to those of the clergy who were more conventional and perhaps more worldly" (123). In her article, "Female Grotesques: Carnival and Theory,"
Mary Russo sees a liberating potential in the performance of femininity. Russo argues that "deliberately assumed and foregrounded, femininity as a mask, for a man, is
a take­it­or­leave­it proposition; for a woman, a similar flaunting of the feminine is a take­it­and­leave­it possibility. To put on femininity with a vengeance suggests
the power of taking it off" (224). For Russo, femininity is an act of agency performed by a subject, rather than a constitutive aspect of a biologically­female individual.
Indeed, many critics have investigated Cather's masculine masquerades: in particular, Cather's high school cross­dressing and her focus on male subjectivity in such
novels as The Professor's House and Death Comes for the Archbishop have led critics to speculate on whether she assumes masculine masks, positioning herself
within male literary traditions in order to legitimate an exploration of lesbian themes, or even to continue writing within a culture with few successful female authors as
models.
The stability of the female identity Le Ber creates depends upon the stability of the home she creates. As Martin and Mohanty's theorizing suggests, Le Ber's home is
maintained by exclusion and suppression. Both the public legend Cécile reviews and Charron's subsequent stories about Le Ber are precipitated by intrusions that
undercut the possibility of maintaining a stable home. In Cécile's story, angels miraculously appear and fix her spinning wheel. In Charron's story, he describes his two
forced meetings with Le Ber. Both of these meetings undermine the possibility of constructing an inviolable space for women to call home; he keeps intruding, bringing
with him male expectations about what a woman's home should be and then telling stories that position him as a victim of Le Ber's refusal to meet those expectations:
"There are plenty of girls, ugly, poor, stupid, awkward, who are made for such a life. It was bad enough when she was shut up in her father's house; but now she is no
better than dead. Worse" (177–178). Although Charron identifies a religious coercion invisible to Cécile because it is withheld from her, his complaints are also
influenced by his disappointment that other institutions which would more directly benefit him—marriage and motherhood—did not claim Le Ber first. Despite
Charron's sense of masculine entitlement, his description of Le Ber refuses the text's earlier stories that imply that Le Ber's religious commitment is the natural fulfillment
of an essential feminine nature. Charron's stories suggest that "safe" religious homes are already constructed by a culture that desires women be located there.
Charron's stories reveal an increasing concern with female performance, with Le Ber's failure to perform a femininity that allows Charron to retain her

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 157

as a sexualized "Other." Charron portrays a Le Ber who moves progressively away from an accepted standard of femininity. His description of her before her self­
imposed seclusion focuses on her hostessing ability and her beauty. He recalls Le Ber "when she first came home from Quebec and used to be at her mother's side, at
the head of a long table full of good company, always looking out for everyone, saying the right thing to everyone" (178). Then, describing their first meeting four years
after her first retreat, Charron says, "She was gracious and gentle, as always, and at her ease. ... There was still colour in her cheeks,—not as rosy as she used to be,
but her face was fresh and soft, like the apple blossoms on that tree where we stood" (179). Le Ber's beauty is still reassuring in its familiarity, but it is immediately
undercut as Charron tells the story of their second meeting many years later, when he hides in the church, waiting for her to emerge from her cell for her solitary
midnight prayers:
She came in, carrying a candle. ... The candle shone up into her face. It was like a stone face; it had been through every sorrow. ... At first she prayed aloud, but I scarcely
understood her. My mind was confused; her voice was so changed,—hoarse, hollow, with the sound of despair in it. ... And once a groan, such as I have never heard; such
despair—such resignation and despair! (182–183)

Shorn of markers of femininity, Le Ber's face is no longer rosy and soft, and her formerly gracious voice has become "harsh and hollow like an old crow's—terrible to
hear!" (180). The change in Le Ber's voice confuses Charron and marks Le Ber as irredeemably changed, as radically "Other." While defiant, even joyful otherness
couched in mystical and miraculous descriptions marks Cécile's story and makes up the legend of Le Ber in public circulation, Charron's sharply contrasting story of
Le Ber enacts a verbal mourning, for him, of the female beauty he has lost. His speech forwards the despair he represents Le Ber as embodying, and it is Charron's
grief that masquerades as Le Ber's when he tells his story to Cécile's father.
As the epilogue to Shadows on the Rock reveals, Cécile eventually substitutes for Le Ber, marrying Charron and performing what was to be Le Ber's role as wife and
as mother of "four little boys, the Canadians of the future" (278). In Charron's story of Le Ber, the beautiful hostess is transformed into the incoherent prisoner, while in
the novel's story of Cécile, the child who takes to creating a home for her father with such enthusiasm is eventually transformed from daughter to wife, exchanged from
father to husband. By leaving unresolved the conflicts presented in the alternate stories of Le Ber, Cather cautions against claims of religious authority or transcendence
as methods of defining autonomous subject positions for women. Further, by suggesting in the epilogue that Cécile's growth to maturity culminates in her substitution

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 158

for Le Ber in marriage to Charron and in the fulfillment of her national duty to Canada by producing sons, Cather insists that spaces—whether domestic or religious—
have costs for women attached to their apparent safety.
Shadows on the Rock reveals that the subject positions available to women undergo continual reinterpretation, both public and private, and the struggle for meaning
lies not only with the story's teller, but also with its audience. The stories in the text not only refuse the illusion of coherence, they are in direct conflict with one another,
and the subject positions available for women are always polarized in the text: Cécile's story is one of adulation, and Charron's story is infused with loss and the desire
to possess Le Ber. Women become the object of desire and the currency of exchange; their serviceability enables his illusion of wholeness. Charron dismisses the
importance of Le Ber's lost dowry, but announces that "I care about defeat" (177). As Cécile realizes, even Mother Juschereau, who avoids the cultural "entombment"
of Le Ber, finds her stories of faith contradicting Cécile's father's stories of advancing science. When Mother Juschereau tells Cécile a story where a bit of bone from a
beloved priest was mixed with gruel and made an ill sailor into a Christian, "Cécile could only hope it would never happen that her father and Mother Juschereau
would enter into any discussion of miraculous cures. Her father must be right; but she felt in her heart that what Mother Juschereau told her had certainly occurred, and
the English sailor had been converted by Father Brébeuf's bone" (127). In each of these stories there is no final interpretation left for the reader to privilege as the text's
meaning.
An implicit argument throughout this chapter is that the text of Shadows on the Rock, which insists on fixity and the absence of change through the final page, wears its
insistence on stability like a mask. Stories and storytelling repeatedly undercut these qualities and reveal them as illusionary. Like several other critics who examine
Cather's use of storytelling, Sharon O'Brien reads Cather's storytelling as a narrative strategy to claim authority by forming literary connections with the storytellers of
her childhood:
Listening to women's talk as she crouched under the quilting frames, the young girl heard the unwritten history of the community that never entered written records or public
history. When Cather became a writer of fiction, she likewise practiced an art of connection: she retold and reworked some of these community stories, passing them on to her
readers, weaving together oral and written narratives, farm women and artists, past and future in her fiction. (29)

The art of connection O'Brien sees Cather practicing may result more from critical desires for feminist recovery of texts, and expectations regarding what women's
writing must do, than from the way storytelling functions in this text. In Shadows on the Rock, storytelling questions, challenges, and in some in­

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 159

stances—such as in the story of Jeanne Le Ber—even resists the expected "woman's work" of connection.
The practice of writing as the creation of safe space also has its parallel in Cather's biography. Cather knew the inevitable failure of an artist to control interpretation
and was concerned about future interpretations of herself, about the ways in which she would become a story. She limited as much as possible the range of
interpretations critics—who also tell stories—could make: Cather and her partner, Edith Lewis, retrieved and burned many of her letters to friends, and their efforts to
destroy a lifetime of personal communication were particularly effective in regard to the exchange of letters between Cather and Isabelle McClung Hamborg, a crucial
love relationship in Cather's life. In her will, Cather forbade publication of any surviving letters, and she refused to allow film or recorded versions of most of her
novels. Despite her efforts, James Woodress estimates that 1,500 of Cather's letters survive in various university collections. Ironically, her testamentary prohibition on
the direct quotation or publication of her letters insures that scholars must paraphrase her words—itself a form of interpretation. Moreover, besides simply making her
personal correspondence less accessible to readers and critics, Cather's actions have fueled abundant speculation about her sexuality.
In her literary biography, Willa Cather: The Emerging Voice, Sharon O'Brien argues persuasively that Cather was a lesbian and had sexual as well as emotional
attachments to the women whose lives she shared. Conversely, James Woodress argues in his biography of Cather, Willa Cather: A Literary Life, that, because
there is no external evidence, claims for Cather as a lesbian are unfounded. At this point in time, Cather's lesbianism has become something of an academic "open
secret," a scholarly closet with parallels to the concept of home desired and challenged in Shadows on the Rock. Although I find O'Brien's arguments regarding
Cather's lesbianism convincing, efforts to definitively position Cather as a lesbian are always vulnerable to challenge and may even run the risk of acquiescing to a
paradigm of sexuality that posits heterosexuality as normative and locates Cather outside of that paradigm. On the other hand, attempts to refute Cather's lesbianism
may rely on the same illusionary paradigm of a stable and normative heterosexuality. Further, heterosexist presumption and homophobia undergird claims that, because
no "proof" exists, Cather must have been, can only have been, heterosexual. As critics, we interpret Cather much as the characters in Shadows on the Rock interpret
Jeanne Le Ber: through the public legend about her or by entering the protected space of personal letters and testamentary prohibition in order to carry out
contradicting stories that reveal as much about her interpreters' desires as they do about Cather.
Shadows on the Rock concludes with an epilogue set fifteen years in the future. Carlin aptly describes the epilogue as "almost ... an extended musing on the idea and
the fact of change, what I believe is the central concern, both

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 160

formal and thematic, of this text" (86). Initially, the epilogue seems to cap the ambivalence of the foregoing pages with happy homecomings. Humbled and aged, Saint­
Vallier returns to Quebec after an absence of thirteen years, while Cécile has found a domestic home in marriage and motherhood. The novel concludes as Cécile's
father rejoices that "he was indeed fortunate to spend his old age here where nothing changed; to watch his grandsons grow up in a country where the death of the
King, the probable evils of a long regency, would never touch them" (279–280). But Saint­Vallier's return is notable precisely because he is changed, and Auclair's
final words cannot drown out the stories preceding them, stories which relentlessly refuse certainty and fixity even as they seek to establish stable homes. Nor can
readers dismiss Charron's substitution of Le Ber with Cécile, an apparently satisfactory and tractable Other, given Le Ber's extreme struggle to elude just such a home
as Cécile now occupies. Carlin argues that "in the brief dialectic about change with which the epilogue closes then, what we read is nothing less than a discussion by
the text about itself" (86). What's more, even the ambivalence of the epilogue might be read as Cather's commentary on the possibility of safe space. Shadows on the
Rock is an extraordinarily challenging novel, one that presents its readers with an examination of the desire for safe space that acknowledges the enormous power and
consolation of that desire, while at the same time investigating its costs, particularly for women. The tensions between the desire for a safe space to call home and the
fundamental questioning of the possibility that such a space can exist present us with an opportunity to unsettle our own homes and interrogate their creation.
Notes
1. "Feminist Politics: What's Home Got to Do With It?" Feminist Studies/Critical Studies, ed. Teresa de Lauretis (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1986),
208.
2. For well­edited selections of Cather's early writing, see Kingdom of Art, Willa Cather's First Principles and Critical Statements 1893–1896, ed. Bernice Slote
(Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1966) and The World and the Parish, Willa Cather's Articles and Reviews, Vols. 1 and 2, ed. William M. Curtin (Lincoln:
University of Nebraska Press, 1970).
3. In her article "Modernism: The Case of Willa Cather," Rose argues that "when Cather suppressed herself, she did it more completely than any writer I can think of."
See Modernism Reconsidered, ed. Robert Kiely (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1983), 139. Rose advocates Cather's pursuit of anonymity as one of the
aesthetic qualities aligning her with the Modernist movement and producing some of her "best" work. In "The Room Beyond, A Foreword on Willa Cather," Willa
Cather: On Writing (New York: Knopf, 1949), Steven Tennant also urges Cather's greatness be found in

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 161

universalizing aesthetic anonymity, with his belief that "A great writer should always have an anonymous quality, something remote like a pregnant silence—which
is silent, and yet contains all sound, all time, all things" (xv). Tennant's metaphor for anonymity, the "pregnant silence," renders anonymity a suspicious desire for female
authors. And silence, pregnant or otherwise, reiterates an unresolvable problem for women: when to write is also simultaneously to include everything in silence, the
authority to speak is a moot issue. Nancy K. Miller has argued more recently that anonymity, even if it were possible, might not be desirable for women authors, who
have a structurally different relationship to authority. In other words, it may very well matter, not only that the writer is a woman, but who that particular woman is. See
"Changing the Subject: Authorship, Writing, and the Reader," Feminist Studies/Critical Studies, ed. Teresa de Lauretis (Bloomington: Indiana University Press,
1986), 102–120. I agree that Cather sought anonymity, especially as it is yoked to universality, and perhaps for a woman writing during Cather's time and place, hers
was an effective strategy toward the goal of publishing and its rewards. But I also see her as constantly undercutting the possibility of anonymity through her use of
storytelling.
Works Cited
Carlin, Deborah. Cather, Canon, and the Politics of Reading. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 1992.
Cather, Willa. Death Comes for the Archbishop. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1927. Rpt. Vintage Books, Random House, 1971.
Cather, Willa. The Kingdom of Art: Willa Cather's First Principles and Critical Statements 1893–1896. Ed. Bernice Slote. Lincoln: University of Nebraska
Press, 1966.
Cather, Willa. Shadows on the Rock. New York: Knopf, 1931. Rpt. Vintage Books, Random House, 1971.
Cather, Willa. "On Shadows on the Rock." Willa Cather on Writing: Critical Studies on Writing as an Art. New York: Knopf, 1949.
Fryer, Judith. Felicitous Space. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1986.
Martin, Biddy, and Chandra Talpade Mohanty. "Feminist Politics: What's Home Got to Do With It?" Feminist Studies/Critical Studies. Ed. Teresa de Lauretis.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1986, 191–212.
Miller, Nancy K. "Changing the Subject: Authorship, Writing, and The Reader." Feminist Studies/Critical Studies. Ed. Teresa de Lauretis. Bloomington: Indiana
University Press, 1986.
O'Brien, Sharon. Willa Cather: The Emerging Voice. New York: Oxford University Press, 1987.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 162

Pratt, Minnie Bruce. ''Identity: Skin Blood Heart." Yours in Struggle: Three Feminist Perspectives on Anti­Semitism and Racism. Brooklyn, NY: Long Haul
Press, 1984.
Rose, Phyllis. "Modernism: The Case of Willa Cather." Modernism Reconsidered. Ed. Robert Kiely. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1983. 123–145.
Rosowski, Susan J. The Voyage Perilous: Willa Cather's Romanticism. Lincoln and London: University of Nebraska Press, 1986.
Russo, Mary. "Female Grotesques: Carnival and Theory." Feminist Studies, Critical Studies. Ed. Teresa de Lauretis. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1986.
213–229.
Tennant, Steven. "The Room Beyond, A Foreword on Willa Cather." Willa Cather: On Writing. By Willa Cather. New York: Knopf, 1949. v–xxiv.
Woodress, James. Willa Cather: A Literary Life. Lincoln and London: University of Nebraska Press, 1986.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 163

THRIVING
While mid to late twentieth­century women's writing certainly runs a wide gamut, it is tempting to identify it at least partially as writing which jumps into the breech,
speaking words heretofore denied women, breaking taboos about language and subject matter. The blues lyrics of a writer like Alberta Hunter demonstrate a sexual
frankness and playfulness previously rare in women's writing. In pleasing her audience with this play, she also earns artistic and economic sustenance. The fiction of
Anne Rice breaks every sexual and social taboo imaginable. Its immense popularity speaks for its timeliness, but also raises questions about how women are currently
using this new freedom of expression.
The goals of contemporary writers seem at once more personal and more public than those of nineteenth­ and early twentieth­century writers examined in this
anthology. Joy Kogawa and Sandra Cisneros, for instance, speculate within their fiction on individual and communal enhancement. They are politically motivated in
their concern about violence against women, people of color, and children, but they are also concerned on a personal level with finding, through narrative, means of
thriving in the aftermath of that violence. Both express, in their own ways, a concern for personal integrity, particularly for women of color who face prejudice daily
from both mainstream and ethnic communities. While these two authors are not speaking for larger groups of women, they are in many ways representative of the
contemporary renaissance of writing by culturally diverse women in the United States and of women's commitment to healing themselves and their communities.
Another way of considering this newfound expression might be in looking at the languages of the body that emerge within the writing considered in this section.
Hunter's playful doubling of language engages both mind and body; Rice's graphic depictions of sex and violence replay, and in some ways control, the moment of
trauma; Cisneros explores a girl's developing consciousness of her body as female through multiple linguistic lenses; and Kogawa creates passages of lyrical prose to
bridge the mind and body. While certainly some writers appear to replay the moment of rupture, other contemporary women writers seem compelled to find a
language that will validate the self—as a mind/body whole—and reintegrate that self into a world made safe for it.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 165

"The Chicana Girl Writes Her Way In and Out: Space and Bilingualism in Sandra Cisneros' The House on Mango Street"
Tomoko Kuribayashi
Sandra Cisneros' young Chicana character/narrator in The House on Mango Street is oppressed in United States society in at least three senses: she is nonwhite,
poor, and female. But the character Esperanza draws her strength from the very sources of her oppression. Her ability to speak two languages with equal fluency and
her compassion for the socially weak and neglected, especially women of her community and of other ethnic origins, give her a unique spatial vision which enlivens her
imagination as a writer and as a social critic. Having mastered two languages, Esperanza knows the two different worlds that the two languages construct and
represent. She is able to travel back and forth between the two languages and the two worlds, creating, in the process, new space for herself and for the people she
wishes to help out—women, the poor, and minorities, with whom she has something in common. This chapter highlights how bilingualism helps the narrator create a
safe space for herself and other Mexican­American women in a society full of violence towards women and minorities. 1
As a young Chicana growing up in a Mexican­American community in Chicago, Cisneros' narrator­protagonist, Esperanza, is keenly aware of the economic and
cultural oppression of the people of her ethnic background in American society, including the oppression of Chicana women within the minority community. Esperanza
shares Gloria Anzaldúa's sense of the danger that women of color face from day to day in the United States as well as in other places:
Woman does not feel safe when her won culture, and white culture, are critical of her; when the males of all races hunt her as prey.
Alienated from her mother culture, "alien" in the dominant culture, the woman of color does not feel safe within the inner life of her Self. Petrified,

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 166
she can't respond, her face caught between los intersticios, the spaces between the different worlds she inhabits. (Anzaldúa 20)

2

Cisneros' narrative illuminates the linguistic, spatial and sexual oppression that racist society imposes on minority—more specifically Chicana—women, but also offers
a somewhat hopeful perspective on future possibilities. Architecture is a central means by which society as well as Cisneros express and experience oppression as well
as hope for change. In the beginning of Cisneros' novel, Esperanza yearns for acquisition of cultural ideals of the white society, most specifically the white, middle­class
house widely displayed in mass media. Esperanza's architectural craving recreates the author Cisneros' childhood experiences in a Mexican­American ghetto in
Chicago. Cisneros recollects her family house, "crowded as the nine of us were in cramped apartments where there were children sleeping on the living room couch
and fold­out Lazy Boy, and on beds set up in the middle room, where the only place with any privacy was the bathroom" ("Notebook" 69). She also remembers
wondering "why our home wasn't all green lawn and white wood like the ones in 'Leave It To Beaver' or 'Father Knows Best'" (72).
These television programs played a significant role in aggravating the Chicana girl's sense of her family's architectural deficiency. Cisneros' narrator, Esperanza, also
wants a house just like the ones she sees on television and all her family members share her dream:
[My parents] always told us that one day we would move into a house, a real house that would be ours for always so we wouldn't have to move each year. And our house would
have running water and pipes that worked. And inside it would have real stairs, not hallway stairs, but stairs inside like the houses on T.V. And we'd have a basement and at least
three washrooms so when we took a bath we wouldn't have to tell everybody. Our house would be white with trees around it, a great big yard and grass growing without a fence.
This was the house Papa talked about when he held a lottery ticket and this was the house Mama dreamed up in the stories she told us before we went to bed. (4)

Despite the parents' hopeful tone, it is unlikely that they will ever have such a house, as the narrative soon makes clear. When socioeconomic conditions render it so
difficult—almost impossible—for Chicano/as to acquire such houses, mainstream culture's architecutral ideal, which purportedly inspires cultural and economic
aspirations in every viewer, only helps oppress the minority populations further.
Young Esperanza is keenly aware of how houses define and represent the resident's social status; so simply having a roof over one's head is not enough.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 167

Esperanza remembers how ashamed she felt when she pointed to a third­floor flat where she lived, to a nun from her school. The nun asked, "You live there? The
way she said it made me feel like nothing. There. I lived there. I nodded" (5). She then resolved that she would have to have "a real house. One I could point to" (5),
to be accepted into mainstream society. When her family moves to Mango Street, she still knows that the house is not respectable enough and yearns to escape to a
better place.
But later her vision changes and she contemplates the possibility of housing the poor in her future house:
People who live on hills sleep so close to the stars they forget those of us who live too much on earth. They don't look down at all except to be content to live on hills. They have
nothing to do with last week's garbage or fear of rats. Night comes. Nothing wakes them but the wind.
One day I'll own my own house, but I won't forget who I am or where I came from. Passing bums will ask, Can I come in? I'll offer them the attic, ask them to stay, because I know
how it is to be without a house. (87)

Owning and controlling her own space is to own her self. One cannot become oneself without having one's own place. As Cherríe Moraga asserts, the "anti­materialist
approach [that some white, middle­class feminists take] makes little sense in the lives of poor and Third World Women" (129), when material conditions are so much
a part of their oppression that coming into possession of material necessities is a must for becoming one's own person. But Esperanza does more than owning herself in
the quoted passage. In other words, she does not unquestioningly embrace white, materialist beliefs in earthly possessions and financial security as a priority in and by
themselves. First, Esperanza challenges mainstream society's definition of the family. Secondly, and more importantly, taking the socially rejected and oppressed—
regardless of their gender, ethnicity, and other differences—into her own space is an expression of Esperanza's defiance of the dominant culture which bases itself on a
rigid socio­economic hierarchy and on dichotomous thinking. Her act turns the condition of exclusion of social outcasts into that of inclusion. Moreover, her gesture
connects her future to her origin, her future self to Mango Street: "I won't forget who I am or where I came from" (21). Merging the public and the private, or the
inside and the outside, is moving toward liberating women of her ethnic background as well as liberating any women who are confined indoors while men move much
more freely outside houses. Once the distinction between the inside and the outside collapses, there is no more confining anybody indoors. Merging the two seemingly
separate spaces, then, means doing away with rigid gender differentiations as well.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 168

In The House on Mango Street, as sociocultural oppressions and future hopes are architecturally expressed, so are the female characters' experiences of social and
sexual violence inseparably linked to their spatial experiences. The text, for example, offers a definition of what public space—space outside houses—means to the
women characters, which in turn determines the meaning of the indoor space and of the female body. The best illustration of this is how, to Cisneros' young narrator,
space outside houses stands for young women's freedom as well as ostracism from the Chicano/a community. Esperanza envies women a little older than herself who
dare roam the night streets in search of romantic adventure. But she also knows how little chance for social acceptance these women will have both in the Chicano
community and in mainstream American society.
Esperanza sees possibilities in the female bodies that float, or almost float, around in the streets. Marin, an older girl Esperanza admires, is one of them. When her
baby­sitter's duties are done in the evening, Marin comes out of her aunt's house. Though "she can only stay out in front, .... What matters, Marin says, is for the boys
to see us and for us to see them" (27). When boys passing by tease her, "Marin just looks at them without even blinking and is not afraid" (27). Later, speculating on
the relationship between a neighborhood boy she fancies and his girlfriend, Esperanza wishes she could be as bold as the girl, Lois. "Everything is holding its breath
inside me. ... I want to sit out bad at night, a boy around my neck and the wind under my skirt" (73). This desire on the young narrator's part and her daring to make
an explicit statement about it are what can possibly enable her to form her own, less inhibiting view of the female body.
Esperanza, however, knows too well what would be the community's judgment on such behavior by young girls. Marin will soon be sent back to Mexico because her
aunt thinks she is too much trouble, and Esperanza's mother criticizes Lois, "those kinds of girls, those girls are the ones that go into alleys" (73). Much as she hungers
for street life and is aware of her body's potentials, Esperanza also fears "outdoors" and her own female body because of the social sanctions waiting for women who
venture out too far. In the vignette "Red Clowns," Esperanza experiences this danger firsthand when she is sexually assaulted by strangers at a carnival.
In The House on Mango Street the female body becomes another kind of the space outside, a prohibited space that women fear and yearn to reconnect to. Yet,
ironically, society demands that the female body not go out into the literal "space outside." If it did, the "inside" would become the "outside," and the social order would
collapse. True, some female bodies are allowed outside domestic space—or excluded from it—to satisfy certain kinds of male sexual desires, but these women are
''public women," deemed unfit for the home and subject to violation and exploitation without limits. Except for these women,

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 169

the female body must be kept indoors so that the status quo of the public/private division is maintained with men in public space and women in private space. Chicana
women in Cisneros' text are allowed no space of their own, with the streets off limits and their bodies made inaccessible. Domestic space is not safe either, as
exemplified by the abuse Esperanza's Chicana neighbors endure at the hand of their fathers and husbands.
Esperanza, however, also has another vision of space outside, that is, a space that her imagination and her writing—and bilingual ability—will create for her outside
and beyond the limits of her Mexican­American community and of the dominant white culture of America. This last kind of "outdoors"—based on her bicultural and
bilingual experiences and abilities—has the potential of redefining the "indoor" space as well as the female body for Cisneros' adolescent narrator. Cisneros' text
demonstrates how being bilingual makes Esperanza aware that there is more than one way to interpret what is spoken and written; bilingualism brings her the
realization that she can choose what suits her purpose best.
Esperanza's name, which comes from her grandmother, who resented but could not undo the confinement brought on her by her marriage, means "hope." "In English
my name means hope. In Spanish it means too many letters. It means sadness, it means waiting" (10). Cisneros' narrative suggests that Esperanza's hope for the future
lies in making the most liberating linguistic choices, beginning with her own name. Taking control of language will enable Esperanza to avoid being trapped inside
houses and inside Mango Street, where her culture confines women and the white culture confines her people, and to go out to find her own house, her own space.
Where she goes to, which space she will fit in, is yet unknown. She will not go into white society as it is. She will instead have to find, or rather create, her own space.
Reminiscing about her grandmother, who "looked out the window her whole life, the way so many women sit their sadness on an elbow," Esperanza says, "I have
inherited her name, I don't want to inherit her place by the window" (11). The window, which could be an in­between space, established on the very borderline of
private and public, and therefore can be subversive, remains a space of oppression and fruitless yearning in Cisneros' text. For example, a beautiful neighbor woman,
Rafaela, is only allowed to talk to the children from her window, because of her husband's irrational jealousy. Not only does Esperanza decide to escape the
limitations of the window space, she also considers renaming herself: "I would like to baptize myself under a new name, a name more like the real me, the one nobody
sees'' (11).
Cisneros' narrative highlights how language—and taking control of it—is a determining factor for Esperanza's future. Taking control of language means taking control
of one's spatial experiences. The narrative of The House on Mango Street is a linguistic manifestation and product of the process in

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 170

which Esperanza creates a new self and a new world. The text also testifies how she can do this through giving herself a new name and discovering a new language,
without disowning the cultural background from which she comes.
The text emphasizes how the narrator's further dream is to come back to where she is from, after successfully venturing out and securing her own space outside
Mango Street: "I have gone away to come back. For the ones I left behind. For the ones who cannot out" (110). This movement envisioned by Esperanza suggests
spiraling, as opposed to the linearity often espoused by Anglo­Saxon cultures, and thus constitutes another challenge to the white society and its culture. The text
indicates that Esperanza "will always be Mango Street" (104), as the three sisters have prophesied. Although the narrator is ashamed of the house on Mango Street,
that she is also fond of it is shown in the way she anthropomorphizes the building: "It's small and red with tight steps in front and windows so small you'd think they
were holding their breath'' (4). Her vision is of becoming a somewhat free (that is, freer than the women she sees suffering around her) agent, perhaps transcultural or
culturally mobile, who can translate herself and what happens to and around her from one language into another, from one place to another. She hopes to be able to
write her way both out and in. In and out of the Mexican­American world where people speak Spanish. In and out, also, of the mainstream American world where
English is the linguistic medium.
Author Cisneros herself sees two voices in two languages speaking in her writing:
These two voices at odds with each other—my mother's punch­you­in­the­nose English and my father's powdered­sugar Spanish—curiously are the voices that surface in my
writing. What I'm specially aware of lately is how the Spanish syntax and word choice occurs in my work even though I write in English. ("Notebook" 72)

Like Esperanza, Cisneros sees herself as "a translator. I am an amphibian. I can travel in both worlds. What I'm saying is very important for the Latino community, but
it is also important for the white community to hear" ("Solo Traveler" B2). 3
Having two languages at one's command may enable a person to avoid being locked into one specific value system, or in one specific identity. As Chris Weedon in
Feminist Practice and Poststructuralist Theory has asserted, our "conditions of existence ... are at one and the same time both material and discursive" (8). If
language—the "discursive"—as well as architecture—the "material"—defines/confines people's bodies and thoughts, Esperanza, as a bilingual and bicultural person
(and female in addition), may be able to "swim" between the two languages/two spaces, and to create her own stories and spaces.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 171

Patricia Yaeger in Honey­Mad Women suggests that being bilingual can emancipate women (and women characters). One of the ways "the writer can bring a
subversive multivoicedness into her text," she says, discussing Charlotte Brontë's novels, is "that the second language can operate as a form of interruption, as a way of
dispelling the power of the myth systems represented by the text's primary language" (37). In Esperanza's case, both Spanish and English are patriarchal languages and
are not in themselves subversive. However, the two languages multiply her options. For example, English gives her a way out in the instance of her first name. Thus,
Esperanza is able to deconstruct the Anglophone world from a Spanish­speaking person's viewpoint as well as question the Mexican­American community's values
from an English­speaker's point of view. Moreover, she can deconstruct and question the patriarchal value system(s), whether Anglophone or Mexican­American,
from a woman's point of view.
Belonging to a culture means knowing what outsiders don't, or at least understanding the same phenomena differently—more accurately. The vignette "Those Who
Don't," for example, illustrates how cultural and linguistic outsiders and insiders view Esperanza's neighbors differently. Outsiders come into the neighborhood scared,
while Esperanza and her friends feel comfortable because they know who is who. When Louie's cousin brings a Cadillac and drives the community kids around before
he gets arrested for a car theft, the children do not share the police's definition of him as a criminal. Rather, he is the cousin of their friend: "They put handcuffs on him
and put him in the back seat of the cop car, and we all waved as they drove away" (25).
Member of two different worlds, Esperanza may be able to establish her own hybrid values to support her visions for new life, for a new world. Gloria Anzaldúa calls
this creation "the lifeblood of two worlds merging to form a third country—a border culture" by "those who cross over, pass over, or go through the confines of the
'normal'" (3). It is also "a synthesis of duality, and a third perspective—something more than mere duality or a synthesis of duality'' (46). In her 1994 article "Purity,
Impurity, and Separation," María Lugones also closely examines the position of a "mestiza" and warns against the mainstream society's attempt to attain "Control over
creativity" (460) by breaking a "hybrid" person into separate components. Lugones stresses the need to protect "hybrid ways of creation" (471). To do so,
"mexican/americans" should not withdraw into their communities, Lugones continues, nor should they assimilate into "the anglo domain" (471). Mexican­Americans'
becoming their own "requires that the language and conceptual framework of the public become hybrid" (471). Esperanza's sally into the Anglophone world, as well as
Cisneros' writing this book, is a manifestation of the hybrid modes of creation and the hybridization of the public world that Lugones speaks of.
Virginia Woolf once wondered which was worse, to be confined or to be excluded: "I thought how unpleasant it is to be locked out; and I thought how

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 172

it is worse perhaps to be locked in" (24). In a way, Woolf herself was culturally bilingual, in that she was at once an educated, upper­middle class person—and
female. Despite her dichotomous view of being both on the inside and on the outside of privilege, Woolf was already starting to break down the barrier between the
two, or to realize that the barrier/distinction is arbitrary and can be defied. Because of her cultural placement, Cisneros' character, Esperanza, may have an even more
flexible vision than Woolf's of what may be possible, when it comes to discerning borderlines and crossing (or stretching) them. Esperanza explores and then rejects
the dichotomy of inside/outside, and posits new alternatives. She will attempt to find, create, and/or establish her own identity and her own space, which will be in both
white and Mexican­American cultures and societies, but which will also be in neither. And she can do so well only if she knows who she is and if she believes in what
she is and does.
Esperanza's sense of self and freedom and its affirmation come from her writing. Her disabled aunt, Lupe, listening to Esperanza's poems, encourages her to keep on
writing, her advice again embodying the strength Esperanza's culture and older women around her can give her:
That's nice. That's very good, she said in her tired voice. You just remember to keep writing, Esperanza. You must keep writing. It will keep you free, and I said yes, but at that time
I didn't know what she meant. (61)

Just as Woolf wrote to create space for women to write in, Esperanza creates space through writing. Just in the same way, I think, the novel, The House on Mango
Street, has created a unique kind of space for its author in the American literary scene, by transforming, or hybridizing, the literary world.
But Woolf asked for a room and good­sized income before she could write. She was keenly aware of the constraints economic and spatial deprivation could impose
on a woman writer's imagination. This awareness is not absent from Cisneros' text nor from Chicana critics' writings. Rather, literary freedom is inseparably linked to
material liberation in both instances. Yvonne Yarbro­Bejarano discusses how "The exclusion of Chicanas from literary authority is intimately linked to the exclusion of
Chicanas from other kinds of power monopolized by privileged white males. Their struggle to appropriate the 'I' of literary discourse relates to their struggle for
empowerment in the economic, social and political spheres" (139). Esperanza's narrative and Cisneros' writing, then, pave the way for Chicanas to come into their
own economically, socially and politically in United States society. As Yarbro­Bejarano writes, "In telling these stories [about themselves and other Chicanas],
Chicanas reject the dominant culture's definition of what a Chicana is. In writing, they refuse the

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 173

objectification imposed by gender roles and racial and economic exploitation" (141). Establishing their identity free of oppressions by racist patriarchal society through
writing becomes the foundation for Chicanas' gaining control over all aspects of their lives. María Lugones also stresses the importance of taking control of "the
production of material life" in a manner of hybrid creativity ("Purity" 471).
In light of the creation of such a self­image, it is significant that the narrator of Cisneros' book speaks from a young female child's point of view. Of course, such a point
of view, presented as malleable and naive, is artificially constructed. Cisneros' adoption of a youthful perspective may, however, suggest the sort of subjectivity a
woman needs if she is to embark on deconstructing the world around her—a more open, vulnerable, imaginative subjectivity that some cultures attribute to children.
Needless to say, such an endeavor can be undertaken only at a tremendous cost to the agent, and it may very well be questioned whether such a thin­skinned
subjectivity can survive this ordeal.
Perhaps more importantly, taking on a child's or an adolescent's point of view is a literary strategy that facilitates Cisneros' narrator's questioning of what is around her
and what has been imposed on her or taken away from her. It also enables her to deconstruct and reconstruct her society, her language, and her body which society
and language forcibly define. In other words, Cisneros may have chosen a girl's point of view so that the deconstructing process is literarily facilitated. As Chris
Weedon says, "Conscious subjectivity, acquired in language, is seen as inherently unstable and subjectivity itself as constantly in process" (87–88). Cisneros' young
narrator, through telling stories and writing, through discovering and/or creating her own language between two established linguistic systems (English and Spanish), will
be able to feel and see the flexibility of her subjectivity, which will let her more easily remold herself and her world view.
Cisneros' novella also follows the coming­of­age formula. Even though people are constantly in process, some cultures, including that of the United States, affirm the
state of being in process only for a specific growing­up time. As adults, people are supposed to be finished. In such a culture, puberty/adolescence becomes a kind of
borderline, a third kind of space. Conveniently, in the case of Cisneros' text this view of the narrator's age as an in­between­but­in­neither sort of space matches her
positioning as a bilingual and bicultural being.
The last vignette of Cisneros' novella, "Mango Says Goodbye Sometimes," addresses the crucial question of whether Esperanza will be able to come back to where
she is from, once she gets out of Mango Street, or of her Mexican­American community. The viewpoint is of a grown­up writer's, not a young girl's:

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 174
I make a story for my life, for each step my brown shoe takes. I say, "And so she trudged up the wooden stairs, her sad brown shoes taking her to the house she never liked."
I like to tell stories. I am going to tell you a story about a girl who didn't want to belong.
We didn't always live on Mango Street ...
I put it down on paper and then the ghost does not ache so much. I write it down and Mango says goodbye sometimes. She does not hold me with both arms. She sets me free.
(109–10).

The rest of the vignette suggests that she will not totally desert Mango Street. She will definitely come back, just as Cisneros has by writing this novella. Through the
very text of The House on Mango Street the narrator moves back to her native community. The narrative is a textual documentation of the homeward movement of
her body as well as of her spiritual homecoming.
The narrator's leaving home is necessary, though, for her to find her self. Anzaldúa says of herself, "I had to leave home so I could find myself, find my own intrinsic
nature buried under the personality that had been imposed on me" (16). Esperanza is taking tremendous risks, and she is fortunate to be able to choose to do so, since
so few of her group of people can afford it. As Anzaldúa says, "As a working class people our chief activity is to put food in our mouths, a roof over our heads and
clothes on our backs" (17). While most women of her ethnicity have had to choose between "three directions ... to the Church as a nun, to the streets as a prostitute,
or to the home as mother," Esperanza is making the newly and sparingly available fourth choice, "entering the world by way of education and career and becoming
self­autonomous persons," or claiming a public identity (Anzaldúa 17). She can do so because she has visions, and also because she has language skills and the energy
which she inherits from the Chicana women around her.
Acquiring education and a career, a minority in a white, racist society risks making compromises and being assimilated into the white world. But retaining one's own
perspective is still possible. In her article, "Playfulness, 'World'­Travelling, and Loving Perception," María Lugones discusses what it means to travel to different
worlds:
Those of us who are "world"­travellers have the distinct experience of being different in different "worlds" and of having the capacity to remember other "worlds" and ourselves
in them...the experience is of being a different person in different "worlds" and yet of having memory of oneself as different without quite having the sense of there being any
underlying "I.'' (11)

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 175

According to Lugones, one of the ways of being at ease in a world is "being a fluent speaker in that 'world.' I know all the norms that there are to be followed, I know
all the words that there are to be spoken" (12). At least linguistically, then, Esperanza can be at ease both in the Anglophone and Mexican­American worlds. Lugones
recommends that we (women) travel to other people's (women's) worlds so that we can look at things, including ourselves, from a different point of view. Cisneros'
character, Esperanza, travels from one world to another and creates a third space of her own. She is not trapped in any one of them. Even the new space she creates
for herself will welcome other travellers, just as her dream house will shelter passing bums. Similarly Cisneros' narrative invites her readers into a new fictional space.
It is important to note that such a straddle as Esperanza assumes can just as easily stifle her voice because the narrator/writer may feel out of place in both systems,
instead of being at home in both. Gloria Anzaldúa finds the in­between space both liberating and murderous to Chicana women, as testified by the two conflicting
points of view quoted from her in this chapter. The balance Esperanza must maintain to preserve the liberating element is extremely delicate. What helps her keep the
just right posture is, as has been pointed out above, her strong connection to the Chicana/o community of her childhood. Yarboro­Bejarano points out the connection
between Cisneros' and Esperanza's writing and their connections to the Mexican­American community:
The House on Mango Street captures the dialectic between self and community in Chicana writing. Esperanza finds her literary voice through her own cultural experience and that
of other Chicanas. She seeks self­empowerment through writing, while recognizing her commitment to a community of Chicanas. Writing has been essential in connecting her with
the power of women and her promise to pass down that power to other women is fulfilled by writing and publication of the text itself. (141)

Cisneros' emphasis on her narrator's ties to the Chicana/o community is another challenge that her narrative issues against the mainstream American individualism.
Nina Auerbach, discussing women outcasts in Victorian England in Romantic Imprisonment, says that "culture takes inspiration from its outcasts" (xvii). Anzaldúa
argues that outcasts tend to have highly developed sensitivity, what she calls "La facultad," "the capacity to see in surface phenomena the meaning of deeper realities,
to see the deep structure below the surface" (38). By being an outcast from the dominant society and temporarily "becoming" an outcast also from her own ethnic
group—exiling herself from the Chicano/a community—Esperanza may become the source from which societies/cultures derive

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 176

their energy and their future. By definition, for an outcast, boundaries are not permeable. However, as outcasts force society and culture to change and grow, the
borderlines shift and expand, creating in the process third spaces in which the oppressed can live and speak out in relative safety.
In The House on Mango Street, at least three elements combine to generate a strategy for creating new, safer spaces which will accommodate women's desires,
including the desire to write: Cisneros' central character's bilingualism, her cultural placement as a minority person within the dominant white culture of the United
States and as a young woman within the segregated Mexican­American community, and her ability as a writer. Cisneros' text suggests that women's writing taking
place in these new spaces will lead to creation of more new spaces where women—more specifically, Chicana women—can develop their abilities and cherish their
dreams.
Notes
1. One important way in which Cisneros' text reaches the audience most in need of the encouragement it offers is the public readings the author often gives. For
example, see the January 7, 1993 New York Times article, "A Solo Traveler in Two Worlds," which reports on her reading at a tiny branch of The Brooklyn Public
Library.
2. Anzaldúa's language can connote essentialism, as in the case of the first word "Woman" in this indented quote.
3. Cisneros uses more Spanish in her poetry, especially in her most recent poetry collection, The Loose Woman, than in her fiction.
Works Cited
Anzaldúa, Gloria. Borderlands/La Frontera: The New Mestiza. San Francisco: Spinsters/Aunt Lute Book Company, 1987.
Auerbach, Nina. Romantic Imprisonment: Women and Other Glorified Outcasts. New York: Columbia University Press, 1986.
Cisneros, Sandra. The House on Mango Street. 1986; New York: Vintage Books, 1991.
Cisneros, Sandra. "From A Writer's Notebook—Ghosts and Voices: Writing from Obsession." Americas Review 15.1 (Spring 1987): 69–73.
Cisneros, Sandra. "A Solo Traveler in Two Worlds." Interview with Mary B.W. Tabor. The New York Times. January 7, 1993. B2.
Lugones, María. "Playfulness, 'World'­Travelling, and Loving Perception." Hypatia 2.2 (Summer 1987): 3–19.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 177

Lugones, María. "Purity, Impurity, and Separation." Signs 19.2 (Winter 1994): 458–479.
Moraga, Cherríe. Loving in the War Years. Boston: South End Press, 1983.
Weedon, Chris. Feminist Practice and Poststructuralist Theory. Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1987.
Woolf, Virginia. A Room of One's Own. 1929; London: Grafton Books, 1977.
Yaeger, Patricia. Honey­Mad Women: Emancipatory Strategies in Women's Writing. New York: Columbia University Press, 1988.
Yarbro­Bejarano, Yvonne. "Chicana Literature from a Chicana Feminist Perspective." Chicana Creativity and Criticism: Charting New Frontiers in American
Literature. Eds. María Herrera­Sobek and Helena María Viramontes. Houston: Arte Público Press, 1988. 139–169.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 179

Abuse and Its Pleasures: Compensatory Fantasy in the Popular Fiction of Anne Rice
Annalee Newitz
I don't want to think of witches as some sort of rare commodity to those who know how to use them.
—spoken by Ash, a character in Rice's Taltos

The story behind the movie Interview with the Vampire, based on Anne Rice's first novel, dramatizes an issue which has plagued Rice as an author for a long time:
she is a marginal cult figure confronting what it means to have a mainstream audience. Rice, whose screenplay for Interview had been kicking around Hollywood since
the late 1970s, had very specific ideas about how the movie should be made. She felt it ought to be something like a low­budget European art film, starring Rutger
Hauer or Jeremy Irons. Hollywood had other ideas and hired all­American movie star Tom Cruise to play the aristocratic Lestat. At first, Rice was appalled, telling
anyone in the press who would listen that mainstream Hollywood stars like Cruise would ruin her work. She appealed to her fans to boycott the movie, and would not
relent until she finally saw an early cut that changed her mind. Taking out a full­page ad in Variety, Rice proclaimed that Cruise had done a wonderful job and
retracted her earlier comments. Later, she told TV Guide in an interview that she would never again scorn her status as a popular author with a mass audience.
Rice, like her cultish vampire heroes, finally gave up lurking in the shadows and cashed in on monstrosity—or, to put it simply, she got used to the idea of selling out.
While Rice wanted to claim initially that she was "victimized" by Hollywood, clearly she was hardly the victim in this situation—not only did she make a small fortune
off the movie deal, but she was also able to use her story of "abuse" to nearly crush the movie project with bad publicity. Although Hollywood and the demands of its
mass audience had supposedly "traumatized" Rice, she finally decided to "join" Hollywood, helping to make the movie version of Interview a smash hit of the
Christmas season in 1995.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 180

In an ironic mirroring of Rice's own "selling out," the heroes in Rice's novels have in common one basic trait: they feel marginalized or abused, but learn to use their
victimhood as a form of empowerment. Her characters often become powerful, wealthy, or famous by taking up the tools of their oppressors—and revaluing their
victimization as something pleasurable and special. Rice's best sellers, for which she is most widely known, include novels about vampires, witches, mummies, and
demons (the five Vampire Chronicles, three novels in the Witch Cycle, The Mummy and Servant of the Bones). In recent years, as she has grown progressively
more famous, Rice has revealed that she also writes sadomasochistic pornography and "bodice ripper" romances under the names A. N. Roquelaure and Anne
Rampling (the Sleeping Beauty trilogy, Belinda and Exit to Eden); she has also written two historical novels.
I want to suggest that Rice's novels—like her brief anti­Hollywood publicity campaign—can function to simultaneously arouse and dismiss her audience's feelings
about various kinds of social abuse. By representing abuse within a contained, fictionalized setting, one might say that Rice generates a therapeutic "safe space" in
which readers can experience and master their anxieties about abuse. And to a certain extent, I want to allow for this possibility in my analysis. But there is also
something deeply troubling about the way Rice invites readers to deal with their anxieties. For ultimately she offers what I will call an "anti­therapeutic" resolution to
abusive situations: her abused characters gain power by sustaining and even celebrating their trauma. Usually this means that they become abusers themselves, learn to
enjoy abuse, or wreak violent revenge upon their abusers. Rice reproduces—often symbolically—the terror and anguish of the abusive situation, but the only way out
is "getting on top" rather than escape from abusive relationships altogether. In other words, she dismisses or limits the possibilities of "safe space" readers might seek in
her fiction by suggesting that nowhere is ''safe" from abuse. Rather than safety, she offers her readers compensatory sadomasochistic fantasies and the promise of
unlimited, vengeful power.
Recently, feminists have begun to ask what it might mean for women to have pleasurable fantasies about rape, or violence, or hurting children—fantasies which are, by
and large, associated with a stereotypically "male" imagination in popular culture. In her landmark work Loving with a Vengeance, Tania Modleski looked at female­
authored "taken by force" scenarios in romance novels and concluded that "we have seen that the desire to be taken by force (manifest content) conceals anxieties
about rape and longings for power and revenge (latent content)" (Modleski 48). What I want to focus on in this chapter is what Modleski calls the "latent content" of
these kinds of fantasies. In Rice's fiction, which often blurs the boundaries between gothic horror, romance, and sadomasochistic pornography, we find anxiety about
transgressive sexual acts coupled with a desire to perform them for the sake of "power and revenge." Fredric Jameson, whose work on popular culture heavily informs

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 181

Modleski's analysis of the romance, suggests that popular narratives struggle to generate allegories adequate to explain social reality (Jameson 281–299). That is,
popular narratives can be understood as allegorical representations of certain social truths, such as the ubiquity of domestic violence, or the terrifying results of class
warfare. I would suggest that there are two such social allegories working together—or perhaps against each other—in Rice's fiction. One, which I will discuss first,
understands Rice's fantastical monsters as figures for sexually abused children and their families. The other allegory, which gets told in her erotic fiction, understands
gendered sexual relations to stand in for specifically economic power relations. That is, I will be offering two allegorical pathways through Rice's work; if we follow
one after the other, we will reach a point where we can see that understanding what is at stake in Rice's fiction means finding a way of reading traumatic sexual
violation together with what might be called traumatic economic violation. Rice's writing functions as an allegory for and symptom of many people's experiences with
abuse: as children, as gendered beings, and as adults who are trying to negotiate their class identities in a capitalist economy.
The Abused Child as Monster
Rice's Vampire Chronicles are comprised of five novels about the relationships between several vampires who form a series of "families." Most notably in the first two
novels, Interview with the Vampire and The Vampire Lestat, we find eroticized, romantic relationships between parents and children. The point­of­view character
in Interview is Louis, a vampire who recounts his experiences during the nineteenth century to a boy who interviews him in contemporary San Francisco. Louis is
made a vampire by Lestat, the point­of­view character in the following four novels. Conversion into a vampire—in which Louis and Lestat exchange blood—is both
erotic and reminiscent of breast feeding, according to Louis:
Lestat whispered to me, his lips moving against my neck. I remember that the movement of his lips raised the hair all over my body, sent a shock of sensation through my body
that was not unlike the pleasure of passion. ... He pressed his bleeding wrist to my mouth. ... I drank, sucking the blood out of the holes, experiencing for the first time since
infancy the special pleasure of sucking nourishment. ... I heard the night as if it were a chorus of whispering women, all beckoning me to their breasts. (Interview 18–21)

In this scene, part of Louis' pleasure is predicated on his "infantile" response to Lestat, who later takes on the role of Louis' neglectful parent and lover. To keep Louis
from fleeing what becomes an increasingly antagonistic relationship, Lestat

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 182

makes a "vampire child" out of a five­year­old girl named Claudia. To produce her, Lestat tempts Louis to drink her blood. Rather than let her die, Lestat feeds her his
own blood and makes her a vampire who will remain in a little girl's body forever. Later, he threatens Louis by pretending he might kill or harm Claudia if Louis
disobeys him. Louis and Claudia become inseparable, and Louis considers their relationship to be a union between "Father and Daughter. Lover and
Lover" (Interview 102). Rice offers many descriptions of Claudia's childish sensuality, heightening our sense that it is precisely her status as a child that makes her so
sexually alluring to her "parent" Louis. In The Vampire Lestat, we discover that Lestat himself has engaged in an eroticized relationship with his biological mother
Gabrielle during and after transforming her into a vampire. Lestat describes:
I leant forward and kissed the blood on [Gabrielle's] open lips ... [then] came the thirst, not obliterating but heating every concept of her, until she was flesh and blood and mother
and lover and all things beneath the cruel pressure of my fingers and my lips, everything I had ever desired. I drove my teeth into her, feeling her stiffen and gasp, and I felt my
mouth grow wide to catch the hot flood when it came. (Lestat 157)

These graphic representations of incestuous desire are palatable —and even erotic—because they appear within the context of fantastical narratives about vampires.
When I have taught these books in English classes, students unfailingly observe that the vampires could not possibly be incestuous because "they're not human, so
human rules don't apply." One characteristic of Rice's vampires, moreover, is that they are absolutely unable to engage in sexual intercourse. All of their erotic pleasure
is directed toward drinking blood (that is, killing people). Rice hints that converting into a vampire causes the genitals to cease their sexual functioning, although she is
quite vague on this point. In other words, Rice provides readers with two ways to disavow that what they are enjoying is a story about parents and children having
sexual relations. First of all, these are monsters, and therefore somehow not parents and children. And second, these monsters cannot have sex anyway. Built into this
double denial is in fact a covert admission that indeed these characters are engaging in incest—for certainly one would not need to utterly discount the sexuality of
these vampires if indeed there were no problematic aspects to the way they choose to act on their erotic desires. Put simply, the kinds of relationships we find Rice's
vampires engaging in are highly suggestive of incest. Yet there is a certain plausible deniability built into any reading that wants to claim the vampires' relations are
strictly incestuous.
It is in this plausible deniability that one finds the Vampire Chronicles offering a way of remembering and understanding child abuse, because Rice's

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 183

representations of abuse are safely contained within the realm of pleasurable fantasy. The idea that people come to terms with memories of abuse through fantasy is a
common one in therapeutic and psychoanalytic work. Judith Herman, in her book Trauma and Recovery, explains how this kind of fantasy could operate in what she
calls "post­traumatic stress disorder." Incest or child abuse victims often suffer from this disorder, a mental state in which people imaginatively—sometimes
pathologically—attempt to come to terms with massive physical and emotional trauma suffered in the past. One of the key ways people experience post­traumatic
stress is through "reenactment":
Adults as well as children often feel impelled to re­create the moment of terror either in literal or disguised form. Sometimes people reenact the traumatic moment with a fantasy of
changing the outcome of the dangerous encounter ... traumatized people find themselves reenacting some aspect of the trauma scene in disguised form, without realizing what
they are doing. (Herman 39–40)

By reenacting, or repeating, the traumatic scene in a context over which they have imaginary control, trauma survivors are able to confront terrifying memories without
always remembering them as they really happened. This is what Herman means when she says trauma victims may reenact memories in "disguised form" or "without
really realizing what they are doing."
Reading Rice's fiction works something like a fantasy reenactment of traumatic sexual child abuse: a reader confronts issues surrounding eroticized encounters between
family members, but she encounters these threatening issues in a romantic, fantastical context. Thus people are invited to endure terrifying memories and feelings in
response to incest or child abuse without having to admit that in fact these memories and feelings are "real," in their own lives or the lives of others. One need not
actually have been an incest or child abuse victim in order to need fantasy reenactments of this sort. As Modleski notes about romance readers, fantasies about being
"taken by force" help alleviate anxieties about rape for women in general, not just rape victims. Likewise, people who are anxious about their own parenting skills or
problems with child abuse might seek representations of these traumas "in disguised form."
Having established that post­traumatic stress disorder might play a part in readers' enjoyment of Rice's horror fiction, we need to look more closely at how Rice's
horror narratives resolve problems of incest and child abuse. Partly, as already stated, Rice situates these problems in the realm of fantasy. But she also chooses a
fantasy realm in which parents and children are vampires, creatures who survive by murdering other people and each other. Interview concludes when Louis and
Claudia murder Lestat because he has mistreated

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 184

them routinely. Lestat survives this "murder," and ultimately tracks them down for a final confrontation. In Paris, having joined a group of European vampires, Lestat
helps to murder Claudia for being an "abomination," a vampire child. According to vampire law among the European vampires, vampire children are strictly forbidden
because they cannot survive on their own. While Interview seems to claim Claudia is killed merely for being a child, she is more importantly a seductive child. Louis
himself, who mourns Claudia's loss, notes that Claudia has become a child who seems to solicit pedophilic, or pseudo­incestuous, desire in her victims:
I was never very far away [from Claudia], and was always uncomfortable ... because I feared her. She'd always been the 'lost child' to her victims, the 'orphan,' and now it seemed
she would be something else, something wicked and shocking to the passers­by who succumbed to her. (Interview 208)

It is this kind of "daughter," who seems aware of the implications of her relationships with Louis or other adults, who is an "abomination" and must be killed. Thus the
seductive child is eliminated because she is a "forbidden" monster. A similar fate meets Akasha, ''Great Mother" of all vampires, in Queen of the Damned, part three
of the Chronicles. Akasha, the ancient Egyptian queen who began the vampire race thousands of years before, goes insane and tries to murder all men on Earth to
make the world a perfect matriarchy. Subsequently, a "family" of vampires—including Lestat and Louis—must murder Akasha, ostensibly to protect all the men in the
world from certain death. But Akasha is more than an exceptionally violent vampire. In Queen, we discover that a "demon" lives in vampire blood who links all the
vampires together—this demon is especially strong in Akasha's blood, and if Akasha is killed all the vampires will die as well. This problem is solved when twin
vampire sisters, Akasha's "first daughters," kill Akasha and eat her heart and brain (Queen 456). What I would point out here is that Akasha serves as the emblem and
reminder of the fact that all the vampires share the same blood. They are all Akasha's children—with the same blood in their veins—and they are all therefore "related"
in some way. This information calls attention to the incestuous overtones in many of the vampires' relationships. Like Claudia, Akasha becomes an abomination to the
vampires and must be eliminated. Characters such as Claudia and Akasha who threaten to make the incestuous fantasy of the Chronicles too literal become "monsters
to the monsters" and must die.
But this kind of "kill the bad guy" resolution is far more complicated than it might seem at first glance. Killing off the "really bad" (or too­literally incestuous) vampires is
another form of denial at work in this fantasy. For all the vampires are pseudo­incestuous monsters (like Claudia), and all of them routinely kill human beings (like
Akasha). Blaming, then eliminating, individual

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 185

vampires for being "abominations" calls attention away from the ordinary abominable acts Rice's other vampires engage in nightly (killing humans and having romances
with their "family members"). Most importantly, it calls readers' attention away from violence and incest in the human world. This fantasy structure—in which bad
individuals take the blame for general misery—resembles "internalization," another symptom of post­traumatic stress disorder. Herman writes that child abuse survivors
often cope with their trauma by blaming themselves for what others have done to them, thus allowing their families to appear blameless and worthy of love. People
who blame themselves for their abuse do so by generating fantasies in which they are inherently bad or evil and therefore "deserve'' everything that has happened to
them:
The language of the self becomes a language of abomination. Survivors routinely describe themselves as outside the compact of ordinary human relations, as supernatural
creatures or nonhuman life forms. They think of themselves as witches, vampires, whores, dogs, rats, or snakes. ... By developing a contaminated, stigmatized identity, the child
victim takes the evil of the abuser into herself and thereby preserves her primary attachments to her parents. (Herman 105)

In the Vampire Chronicles, there is no single "self" who takes the blame away from a single family perpetrating incest or abuse, but there is an entire community of
monsters who can take the blame for human crimes. These monsters are "outside the compact of ordinary human relations," and therefore cannot help the fact that
they are perverse by human standards. By generating a series of sympathetic and monstrous "selves" readers can identify with, Rice sets up a version of internalization
in her fiction. Readers are reassured that human families are not "bad" because "only vampires would act like that." Whenever these vampires come too close to
reminding us of human family dysfunction, they are eliminated anyway—because they deserve it.
Internalization fantasies—in which bad monsters deserve the abuse they get—come up repeatedly in the Witch Cycle, which contains three of Rice's more recent
books. These lengthy novels chronicle the history of the Mayfair family through thirteen generations. Each generation contains one "witch" who can communicate and
have erotic encounters with a polymorphous demon named Lasher. (Lasher, by the way, is the same type of demon we saw in the Vampire Chronicles living in the
vampires' blood.) The Witch Cycle contains the only literal representations of incest we get in any of Rice's fiction, and it also contains some of the most graphic
portrayals of violent monsters as well. Before I discuss the literal incestuous relations in these novels, I want to lay out the fantasy incest monster scenario. Lasher, who
yearns to

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 186

become human, is finally "born" at the end of The Witching Hour when his spirit "merges" with the fetus inside the thirteenth generation witch, Rowan Mayfair.
Rowan, Lasher's "mother," is kidnapped, held prisoner, and raped by Lasher in the second novel Lasher and is forced to bear his daughter, with whom he also
copulates and plans to have a child. One of Lasher's monstrous properties limits his ability to father children unless he can find a person who has genetic material
compatible with his own. Only Rowan and Lasher's daughter Emaleth have that genetic material. Lasher ends with one of the most startling pseudo­incestuous
fantasies I have ever encountered, which mirrors the ''eating the mother" scene at the end of Queen of the Damned. Rowan, nearly dead, is revived when she kills
Emaleth and then drinks her dead daughter's breast milk:
[Rowan] shot three bullets into the girl's face ... "Oh, Emaleth, oh, baby, oh, little Emaleth," she sobbed. The girl lay dead, her arms out, her shirt open, face a soft mass of blood. ...
And then [Rowan] closed her mouth again on the girl's breast. The room was still. No sound but the sound of suckling. Rowan drank from the left breast and then moved to the
other, sucking as ravenously as before. ... At last she sat back, wiping her mouth, and a low sad groan came from her, and another sob. (Lasher 557–8)

Emaleth is killed because she is unable to do anything but give birth to more monsters like her father. But I would argue that, like Claudia, Emaleth must be eliminated
because she is a reminder of incest.
The Witching Hour, which is primarily the story of Rowan and her witch ancestors, introduces us to the Mayfair family and Lasher's relationship with them. A great
deal of The Witching Hour is a "case file" on the Mayfair family compiled by the Talamasca, a secret society which has been investigating paranormal phenomena
since the Middle Ages. Descriptions of Rowan's own deepening relationship with Lasher are intercut with passages from this "case file," which begins in the early
fifteenth century with the first Mayfair witch who can summon the demon Lasher. In Rice's mythology, demons are beings who are only dimly intelligent, and often
appear self­aware only because they are able to mimic the human beings who summon them. Rice makes it clear that Lasher is attracted to the Mayfair witches
because, in mimicking them, he becomes self­conscious and human; in other words, Lasher's identity can only be a reflection of the Mayfair family he emulates. Like
other demons in Rice's work, the mostly invisible Lasher is able to cause small rainstorms, move objects, and appear to the women who conjure him (whom he can
also "touch," particularly in a sexual manner). Because the ability to summon demons is an inherited trait, Lasher is passed down from generation to generation in the
Mayfair family. Once the family has amassed great wealth on a

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 187

colonial­era plantation, they begin a tradition of incest and inbreeding which seems to culminate with Julien Mayfair, the only man to whom Lasher ever appears. Julien
lives during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries and is Rowan's great­great grandfather. He has a daughter by his sister Katherine named Mary Beth, and also has a
daughter by Mary Beth. Rowan's grandmother is a product of the union between Mary Beth's daughter Stella and Mary Beth's brother Cortland. Rowan, in other
words, is the result of several generations of incest. And Lasher seems to follow the most incestuous strain in the family, attaching himself to Julien's own incestuous
forebears and later serving Julien's offspring in particular.
Lasher is also fond of imitating Julien's appearance; when he does "appear" to the Mayfair witches, he takes on the guise of Julien as a young man. That is, Lasher is
strongly identified with Julien, who has a predilection for incestuous relationships. Lasher's significance as a figure who stands in for the family's incestuous relations
becomes particularly clear in a description of Julien's sister Katherine. The narrator of the Talamasca "case file" writes, "But other than the tales of incest, which
characterize the Mayfair history since the time of Jeanne Louise and Pierre [Mayfair], there are no occult stories about Katherine" (Witching Hour 393). What is
noteworthy about this passage is the slippage between "tales of incest" and "occult stories.'' Here we see the extent to which Rice tends to conflate incest and the
occult, a move which robs incest of its reality while at the same time strongly associating it with a mythical figure who is destroyed by the end of Lasher.
I would point out that Lasher, besides being a supernatural monster, is also Rowan's child. He is therefore associated with an entire family history of incest and he
becomes the final product of that family when Rowan helps him to merge with the body of her unborn baby. Lasher is both perpetrator and progeny of incest. One
might attribute Lasher's dual role to the effect of internalization fantasies at work in the Witch Cycle, where Lasher becomes the child who takes the blame for his
family's abuse. Lasher performs a function similar to Rice's vampires: he is the fantasy figure who acts out both the crimes and the guilt of an abusive family. Lasher's
position as child and perpetrator of incest, I would argue, is not necessarily a locus of identification for child abuse victims engaging in internalization. He might just as
easily be a figure for the kind of projection that goes on in abusive families when a parent blames his child for being "seductive" or "bad" and therefore deserving of
rape or beatings. That is, Lasher is the kind of "child" we might find in the fantasies of a parent who wishes to disavow guilt or responsibility for having abused a child.
Furthermore, we discover in Taltos, the third book of the Witch Cycle, that Lasher is a deviant and unnaturally evil member of a race of good beings known as the
"Taltos." Ash, a benevolent Taltos, tells Rowan and her husband the history of his race, who are nothing like the violent and hypersexual

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 188

Lasher. This further confirms our sense that Lasher, like Claudia or Akasha, is a monster among monsters who deserves any punishment he might get.
In fact, Lasher's rape and abuse of Rowan make it possible for Rice to convert the Witch Cycle into a story about a parent's revenge upon a child who has abused
her. At the conclusion of Lasher, when Rowan kills both Lasher and Emaleth, it would seem that Rowan has in fact come to occupy the position of child in relation to
her own children. Rowan nurses from Emaleth after killing her, as if Emaleth were in fact a "parent" to her mother. Lasher and Emaleth's instantaneous growth into
adults directly after being born underscores my point. By blurring the line between parent and child, Rice generates a fictional space in which children can be cast as
perpetrators of child abuse. Rice's representations of parents and children help to explain her habit of inviting readers to identify with characters like Lasher and Lestat,
who repeatedly abuse their "families." The Witch Cycle and the Vampire Chronicles begin with books told from the point of view of individuals who are hurt or abused
by characters who later become sympathetic protagonists. While Lasher is the frightening, overwhelming monster in The Witching Hour, he tells his own story in
Lasher and explains why it is that he has behaved so ruthlessly. Lasher is certainly a story about how Lasher abuses Rowan, but it is more importantly a story of
Lasher's own history of abuse; we discover he has been "born" to human parents before who forced him to participate in humiliating pagan rituals, neglected him, and
scorned him. In fact, Lasher believes he is a reincarnation of ''Saint Ashlar," who Rice connects to a pagan­influenced Protestant church in Scotland. We discover that
Lasher is no monster, but actually a saint who cannot help but desire to reproduce—his need to reproduce incestuously, it turns out, is built into the rituals of Saint
Ashlar. Lasher is represented as a victim of the very sexuality which he has used to victimize his mother and daughter. He is adult and child, perpetrator and victim.
Likewise, the Vampire Chronicles begin with Louis' story in Interview, but the second novel The Vampire Lestat is told from Lestat's point of view (and, like
Lasher, is named for its protagonist). While Lestat is a cold and manipulative character in Louis' story, we discover in The Vampire Lestat that Lestat has himself
been used and hurt. Like Lasher, Lestat tells a story about his painful intimate relationships which is intended to solicit readers' sympathy and make his crimes against
Louis and Claudia both understandable and forgivable. In these monster stories about child abuse, all of the characters ultimately appear to be victims in the end. Rice
invites readers to feel deeply ambivalent about characters who are abusive: at any moment, we might discover that these abusers are victims too, and therefore we
cannot hold them responsible for their cruelty to others. The safe space where Rice stages and masks sexualized child abuse is therefore a safe space for both
perpetrators and victims. It is a

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 189

space where the line between victim and perpetrator is impossible to draw, and therefore Rice makes it impossible to judge whether or not child abuse is in fact
abusive at all.
Sexual and Economic "Safe Spaces"
While Rice's explicitly supernatural narratives tend to disavow abusive sexuality or relegate it to the realm of the occult, her pornography, erotica, and historical novels
do precisely the opposite. The Sleeping Beauty trilogy (The Claiming of Sleeping Beauty, Beauty's Punishment, and Beauty's Release) and Exit to Eden are
Rice's most explicit sadomasochistic novels, and all offer graphic representations of what might be considered "perversity" or "obscenity" to their readers. The erotic
romance Belinda and historical novel Cry to Heaven are not about sadomasochism, but nevertheless fall into the category of ''perversity." I use the terms "perversity"
and "obscenity" advisedly, to designate sexual acts which do not conform to an admittedly narrow definition of mainstream heteronormative sexuality. 1 These novels
celebrate coercive sexuality, and hinge upon erotic fantasies variously involving rape, bondage, castration, and pedophilia. What connects the erotica and historical
novels to the Witch Cycle and the Vampire Chronicles is Rice's use of "safe" fantasy spaces, and a broadening investment in the idea that victims and perpetrators of
abuse can achieve a measure of freedom by switching positions with each other.
Exit to Eden serves as a kind of commentary on the way safe fantasy space gets set up in the Sleeping Beauty trilogy, and in fact the Sleeping Beauty novels
themselves are referred to by a character in Exit to Eden as "erotic classics" (Exit 16). Exit is the story of Lisa, a young woman who works as a trainer at "The
Club," an exclusive, private resort where people pay to participate in sadomasochistic fantasies of their choice. The Club is divided up into masters, slaves, and
trainers, and each group performs a different role. Masters are The Club's "clients," the wealthy patrons who come to be erotically serviced. Slaves are paid—by
contract—to be trained as people who will service the masters. Lisa describes how The Club works as a safe space:
The Club frightens the slaves at first. It terrifies them. But in a real way, The Club is a great womb. It's an immense community where no one is ever abandoned, and the lights
never go out. No real pain or damage is ever inflicted. There are never any accidents at The Club. (11)

Lisa describes The Club as a place where "no real pain or damage is ever inflicted," and yet notes that its slaves are terrified by it. That is, while The Club does not
"really" hurt its slaves, it certainly arouses genuine emotions in

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 190

them. Here we see Rice setting up a boundary between ritualized (that is, pleasurable) abuse and "real" abuse or "real" sexuality. But no such boundary exists between
emotions experienced in sadomasochistic ritual and emotions felt in "reality." This is a telling contradiction that recurs throughout Rice's pornography: "real" violence
may not be occurring, but real emotions of terror and pain may result.
One of the ways Rice builds her insular pornographic spaces is through the super­abundant wealth her characters often take for granted. The Club caters to the richest
and most well­connected people in the world; or rather, its masters are wealthy, while its slaves are paid (though we understand that they may simply "choose" to be
paid and perhaps do not really need the money). That is, The Club is a safe space mostly because characters pay to make it so. Located on a privately­owned island
off the Florida coast, The Club is an extremely elite and expensive vacation spot. Understood this way, s/m sex at The Club is just another high­priced diversion with
fashion accessories. Furthermore, its inhabitants are not only safe from "real" sexual violence, but also the kind of violence motivated by poverty they might encounter
in crime­ridden urban areas. The Club is "safe" for s/m, but more importantly it is a "safe" enclave for the upper­class.
In the fairy tale style aristocrats of the Sleeping Beauty trilogy, we find another demonstration of how class relations tie into s/m safe spaces. Slaves in these novels are
young aristocrats (princes and princesses mostly) who are being "trained" in brutally erotic ways to prepare them to take their places in the ruling class. To become a
truly gifted queen, the princess Beauty must first be degraded and abused by "the Queen" of the s/m castle where the first two novels take place. Here, "private" and
"safe" forms of sexual abuse are intended to prepare young people to exercise public power as members of the aristocracy. Furthermore, the most "unsafe'' and
terrifying punishments the characters endure take place "in town," where they are sold to commoners who sexually assault them and force them to work at menial jobs
tending bar or grooming horses. It is clear that the menial jobs are far worse punishment than the sexual assaults.
Robert Stoller describes sadomasochistic sexual fantasies as revisions of early traumatic experiences in which people learn to convert remembered pain into pleasure.
"The trauma in each perversion script ... is converted to a triumph. The attackers of earlier times are defeated, undone, unable to persist in their attack. ... Now the
victim is the victor and the trauma a triumph. ... If the story is well­constructed, one feels guiltless and without anxiety" (Stoller 32). Stoller's observations offer a way
of understanding how Rice's pornography might work as a psychological defense against the kinds of abuse it reenacts. Part of the purpose of these fantasies for
readers might be, as Stoller suggests, symbolic mastery over remembered experiences of domination (sexual or otherwise)

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 191

which they did wish to participate in and which certainly did not afford them pleasure. Furthermore, Rice's tendency to confuse sexual and economic subordination
would lead readers away from naming one possible source of their trauma: having to perform the kinds of menial jobs which, for characters in the Sleeping Beauty
trilogy, are merely another part of an s/m sex game.
Readers' ability to feel pleasure—and even have an orgasm—while reading about sexual humiliation and subjugation might be considered one way of masking painful
feelings about their class and social positions. Class division generates many forms of social abuse which might seem to mirror the polarized roles and abuse we find in
s/m gaming. However, the "bottom" in s/m abuse ultimately gets as much—if not more—pleasure as the "top." Rarely do we find the "bottom" class in a capitalist
society getting anything other than abuse from ''tops"; certainly there is no pleasure in an underclass position. Conflating class division with s/m role division invites us to
believe that the underclass gets just as much gratification from its position as the ruling class does. The Sleeping Beauty trilogy, of course, promises that all "bottoms"
will eventually be "tops" both sexually and as a class.
Additionally, Rice's pornography and erotica suggest that romantic "liberation" from sexual gaming comes when male and female sexual roles can be made fluid and
interchangeable. For example, in Exit, Elliott falls in love with Lisa when she puts on a "double phallus" and has anal sex with him as if she were a man. Rice is careful
to represent Elliott responding to Lisa's female/male body as particularly seductive:
She lowered the phallus and pushed one end of it up and into herself ... the other end curving outwards, and toward me just exactly as if she were a woman with an erect cock. The
image was stunning: her delicate form and the gleaming cock rising so perfectly from the tangled curly hair. ... Then came that exquisite feeling of penetration, of being opened,
that gorgeous violation as the oiled cock went in. (Exit 121)

Later, the two reverse positions and Elliott says, "I went on fucking her harder ... than I ever fucked anything or anyone—male or female, whore or hustler, or
powerless phantom of my imagination—in my life" (Exit 123). He is able to experience a kind of sexuality with Lisa that transcends gender and even material reality.
This lays the foundation for their emotional bond. Of course, Lisa and Elliott's "trading off" is largely sexual, and within the context of role playing. Nevertheless, it
might be said to offer readers a sense that liberation from traditional gender roles is possible, and therefore to make the space of sadomasochistic fantasy all the more
alluring. To the extent that gender roles can be compared to class positions, this fantasy about fluid identity can be said to hide another fantasy about cash fluidity.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 192

There is even a degree to which Rice's position of authorship defies traditional gender roles, and makes her pornographic representations seem not merely "safe" but
"liberatory." Pornography, as critics like Andrea Dworkin have argued, is most often considered a "male genre.'' Dworkin writes that "strains of male power are
intrinsic to both the substance and production of pornography" (Dworkin 24). But what happens if a woman is responsible for the "substance and production of
pornography"? Many contemporary feminists would argue that Rice is in some ways "subverting" the structure of domination Dworkin criticizes in pornography, and
that by occupying an authorial voice so often reserved for men Rice challenges the idea that women are different from—and subordinate to—men. Theorist Judith
Butler argues that when women take on or imitate aspects of male identity "both [genders] lose their internal stability and distinctness from each other" (Butler 123).
What Butler consistently ignores in her analysis is the way certain forms of "distinctness" get maintained even as gender roles wither away. Not only is Rice taking on a
"male" identity as a pornographer, but she is also taking on the identity of a capitalist who makes money at it. Pornography is one of the most notorious "spaces" in
which sexuality and economics intermingle. Thus, "subverting" gender identity in the context of pornography does not necessarily mean subverting power and authority
in general. One form of hierarchy (gender) may simply be swapped for another (class). Specifically, we might understand Rice's fluid gender roles as a simultaneous
repetition of and protest against class roles—particularly abusive ones.
Cry to Heaven, Rice's historical novel about castrati opera singers in eighteenth­century Italy, speaks directly to the way non­traditional gendered identity is bound up
with an absorption/rejection of ruling class authority. 2 Tonio, the main character, is a young man from a family of statesmen whose father Carlo has him castrated and
sent away to live among eunuchs for political reasons. Subsequently, Tonio becomes a famous opera singer who can play both male and female parts on stage. In
large part, this novel is a celebration of Tonio's ambiguous sexuality, his love affair with his singing teacher Guido (another eunuch), and late Renaissance Italy. At the
same time, its plot is something like a "rape revenge" narrative, for the novel's climax comes when Tonio is able to confront and kill his father for having mutilated and
abandoned him. Carol Clover has described the rape revenge narrative in film as a genre in which male audience members identify with a female hero who stalks and
often kills her former rapists. The rape revenge narrative can be understood as a site in which gender role swapping is foregrounded: male audience members identify
with its heroine because she takes on a "masculine"—that is, violent—role in order to avenge her own abuse (Clover 114–165). Tonio's castration is described as a
form of rape: "He felt his legs forced apart, hearing the cloth rip before the cold air touched his nakedness.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 193

'NOOOO!' he was roaring between clenched teeth" (Cry 136). Moreover, in a telling reproduction of the terms of Clover's argument, Tonio is able to get revenge
upon Carlo by dressing up as a woman and posing as a prostitute to seduce him. Although Tonio reveals his true identity while dressed as a woman and kissing Carlo
on the lips, he changes into men's clothing before killing him. Carlo interprets Tonio's actions as "too clever," for the only times Carlo is unguarded are when he visits
prostitutes.
What Tonio has lost in his castration, besides his literal maleness, is also his "male entitlement," or rather the money and social position he might have inherited had he
remained both a man and Carlo's son. He has been violated economically as well as sexually. To recover, Tonio finds a "safe space" in which he can gain a form of
wealth and prestige which is comparable to his father's. He becomes a famous and sought­after opera singer, who travels in the same powerful circles as political
figures. Tonio's ability to perform as both a man and a woman is not specifically what enables him to wreak violent revenge upon his abusive father. Tonio can only be
a man/woman because he is already a member of the privileged "artist" class, with access to money and powerful social connections. These connections, and the
money required to maintain them, are most importantly what help Tonio enter Carlo's territory undetected, armed, and prepared to escape quickly. Tonio rejects his
father's authority, but he does it by imitating it in nearly every way: Tonio uses political power and violence to destroy his father, just as his father once used these
methods to destroy him.
Making Money
Revenge upon authority—this time maternal—returns in Rice's erotic romance novel Belinda. This is Rice's only novel in which adult­child sexual relations are
explored in a literal sense. Belinda is the sixteen­year­old lover of forty­four­year­old Jeremy Walker, an author of children's books about little girls. Jeremy is
wrestling with the influence of his dead mother, a writer of historical romances who requested that he continue to write under her name after her death. We discover
Jeremy's deepest secret is that he wrote his mother's last two novels, which were both smash hits. Belinda meets Jeremy while on the run from her mother, a suicidal,
neglectful actress named Bonnie who has tried to shoot Belinda for sleeping with her current husband. During the course of their affair, Jeremy begins to paint nude
portraits of Belinda, occasionally putting her in settings reminiscent of his children's books (in one portrait, she is surrounded by dolls). His representations of their
sexual relationship in these paintings become an act of revenge for both of them; Jeremy wants to use them to "commit suicide" as a children's author and escape from

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 194

having to identify with and paint little girls, while Belinda wants to get revenge upon her mother, who has tried to ruin Belinda's career as an actress.
Jeremy and Belinda wish to use the "Belinda paintings" to embark upon new career paths. That is, their revenge will be fame and fortune. Just as Tonio's revenge upon
Carlo was a simultaneous embodiment and rejection of parental authority, so too is Jeremy and Belinda's. They are enslaved by the memories and authority of their
mothers because their mothers are famous and wealthy artists. Furthermore, both—but particularly Belinda—have been unable to escape their mothers' authority
because they have been dependent upon an inheritance (or payments) for their livelihood. In Jeremy's case, this is somewhat more complicated, for his children's
books have made him independently wealthy; however, as Belinda points out to him, the content of his children's books—which are about little girls who live in huge
Victorian homes—demonstrate that he feels like a little girl trapped in his mother's house. Jeremy's mother has even left him her name in her will so that he can continue
to write her books after she is dead. He therefore struggles with the burden of having inherited not only her money, but also her identity as a writer.
What I would point out about Belinda is that it, of all Rice's books, comes closest to literally representing what is at stake in her pornography, historical fantasy, and
gothic horror fiction: that is, the way class identity is the foundational trauma against which Rice defensively generates fantasies of fluid parent/child and male/female
roles. In effect, what I want to argue is that Rice's fantasies in which abusive relationships become pleasurable or ambiguous are ways of thinking through the abuse
and pleasure generated by capitalism. I do not wish to claim that all trauma in Rice's work is strictly economic, but I do want to call attention to the way class returns
again and again as the buried term around which all other forms of abuse coalesce and become coherent. Because Belinda comes so close to admitting how salient
class issues really are to its main characters, it is also the novel in which we confront most explicitly the results of child abuse and sexual transgression. You might say
Belinda is a novel markedly without a "safe space": it does not take place in a fantasy realm, or within an occult story, or in history. I would suggest that the fantasy of
adult/child sexual relations, which informs Rice's gothic horror and erotica, must become explicit in Belinda as a kind of distraction from the narrative about class
trauma, and upward mobility as a form of reenactment and revenge. 3 The moment at which the repressed term of economic class threatens to become conscious is
also the moment at which we are invited to become utterly shocked and absorbed by a flagrantly literal fantasy of pederasty.
Now I want to backtrack for a moment and reexamine abusive relations in Rice's horror and erotic narratives as figures for capitalist class relations. I contended
earlier that one might characterize the "family units" in the Vampire Chronicles as abusive, and in particular as incestuous. Interview, the first novel,

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 195

is Louis' firsthand account of the way Lestat abused him and their "child" Claudia. But what cements the bond between Lestat and Louis? What is it that has brought
about their abusive relationship in the first place? Quite simply, Louis' money. Louis is the son of a wealthy plantation owner, and Lestat is an impoverished noble's son
from France. Lestat has no idea how to manage his finances, and for this reason he chooses to make Louis into a vampire: Louis can be his companion, and quite
literally, his accountant. Louis says:
Lestat had always known how to steal from victims chosen for their sumptuous dress and other promising signs of extravagance. But I suspected that beneath [Lestat's]
gentleman's veneer he was painfully ignorant of the most simple financial matters. But I was not. And so he could acquire cash at any moment and I could invest it ... and so for
that he had ushered me into the preternatural world that he might acquire an investor and manager for whom these skills of mortal life became most valuable in this life after.
(Interview 38–39)

Later, Louis says that Lestat "could persuade me to kill a child, but not to part with my money" (Interview 96). Integral to their "family," then, is not just Lestat's
abusive emotional power, but also Louis' control of their money. Furthermore, when the vampire "family" triumphs over Akasha at the end of Queen, they declare their
solidarity with one another—and celebrate their triumph over the kind of abuse perpetrated by Akasha—by opening an elite, expensive mall in Miami together where
they can shop and hunt for mortals. In the last chapter of Queen, we follow Lestat as he walks through the mall, which is connected to a mansion where the vampires
live together. As he gazes at the stores and the items for sale, he also watches people walk by and hungers for their blood. Finally, he has to leave the mall because he
realizes "somebody is going to die'' (Queen 474) if he keeps shopping. What I would want to point out is that Rice's vampires are not just a kind of projection of the
dysfunctional family into the realm of fantasy; for this fantasy hinges on their identities as capitalists who steal money and blood from their victims to become rich and
remain immortal. The idea that capitalists become wealthy through robbing and killing is as traumatic—and, in many ways, as true—as the idea that families can be
sources of abuse and violation. That these kinds of traumas get spoken together in Rice's work is therefore not surprising. That both ideas must remain mystified by
their association with fantastical monsters is equally unsurprising.
The Witch Cycle figures the intertwined traumas of economic and family relations in the demon Lasher. Lasher, as I noted above, is both source and result of the
Mayfair family's history of incest. He is also the source of their enormous wealth, and in fact the Mayfair witch that he chooses to consort

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 196

with in each generation is dubbed inheritor of "the legacy." "The legacy" is the Mayfair fortune. Therefore, Lasher represents what is popularly called ''the cycle of
abuse," which gets handed down from generation to generation in dysfunctional families and he represents a vast amount of money handed down as well. In fact, what
has held the Mayfair family together in spite of its incestuous and violent tendencies is its accumulation of money. Like the capitalist vampires, Lasher has made the
Mayfairs wealthy through stealing and spying on their business competitors. To a certain extent, the Witch Cycle is a fantastical rendering of the same issues at stake in
Belinda: characters are locked into abusive family relationships because they depend upon an inheritance to maintain their class identities.
Taltos, the third novel of the Witch Cycle, provides another example of the way class seems to structure supernatural monstrosity. As I mentioned earlier, a "good"
Taltos named Ash is introduced in this novel; he ultimately explains that Lasher is a Taltos who has become a vengeful, insane spirit. Rice convinces us that Ash is
different from Lasher in two basic ways: he abstains from sex, and he is the impossibly wealthy CEO of a corporation that mass­produces children's toys. Ash
speculates that capitalist mass production might even be a form of salvation, and thinks to himself that "This commerce, this endless multiplicity of beautiful and useful
things, could save the world, ultimately" (Taltos 8). Rather than producing children, as Lasher does, Ash produces things for them to buy. The message seems to be
that monsters are good if they are independently wealthy. Lasher's wealth is parasitic upon the Mayfairs—he has had to attach himself to a family in order to make
money, and to inherit that money he has to make sure he is born into the family at some point. While Lasher is demonized and killed, Ash is rewarded: finally, Ash
ends up "marrying" a Taltos born to Mona Mayfair, the young witch Rowan has named the next "designee" of the Mayfair fortune. Taltos ends with an exultant,
mystical sex scene in which Ash and Morrigan Mayfair (Mona's Taltos baby) are joined at last. The distinction between human and monster ends up appearing far less
important than the distinction between rich and poor: a wealthy monster can marry into a wealthy human family.
While both Rice's horror fiction and her erotic fiction contain numerous depictions of fluid family and gender roles, her characters exist in a rigidly hierarchical class
framework. In some sense, Rice's vampires, witches, and sexual adventurers toy with their identities precisely because they are securely positioned as upper middle­
class. Lisa, of Exit to Eden, has simultaneously taken up sadomasochistic role­playing games and achieved an upper­middle class status. Telling the story of her
affiliation with The Club, she says:
I'd made more money at twenty­seven than I'd ever dreamed I'd make in a lifetime. Now and then I'd try to remember what it was like when I wanted

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 197
all those gold­covered lipsticks at Bill's Drugs on Shattuck Avenue, and only had a quarter for a pack of gum. (Exit 5)

Her money and her sexual role­playing are inextricably linked. I would also point out that in the fourth installment of the Vampire Chronicles, The Tale of the Body
Thief, Lestat switches bodies with a human being and becomes impoverished. As soon as he is in a mortal body, he is rendered powerless (and violently ill) because
the "body thief" who has taken Lestat's vampire body has also seized control of Lestat's bank accounts. Lestat, without money, nearly freezes to death because he has
no place to sleep. Becoming human, in Tale, is to surrender economic power. This solidifies an already­existing connection between Rice's vampires and a fantasized
capitalist class. Economic identity is fluid in Rice's novels (to the extent that characters like Lisa and Lestat do rise and fall in class status), but only in a limited sense.
Unlike the fluidity of family and gender roles, class fluidity is accompanied by disaster. Becoming poor is associated with mortality, desperation, and horror. Rarely do
her characters become poor; in fact, nearly all of Rice's characters are upwardly mobile or already wealthy. The Feast of All Saints, for example, is the chronicle of a
community of people trying to become middle­class. Characters in Feast who do not make it out of poverty die or become "kept women."
Finally, Rice's portraits of fluid power relations in families and sexual couplings take place within the context of abuse and sadomasochism because they represent an
effort to come to grips with (and yet deny) the painful intractability of class identity. Lynn Chancer has postulated that:
The relationship between capitalist and worker is analogous to a sadomasochistic one: sadomasochism may be a social fact of life under capitalist systems like that in the United
States. Like sadomasochism, U.S. capitalism is based on a conditional form of social psychology that brings severe repercussions—the potential loss of livelihood, itself symbolic
of the ability to live—should it be questioned too independently. (Chancer 122)

That is, sadomasochism is itself installed in our economic relations. Furthermore, family relations (abusive or not) can in large part be conducive to sadomasochistic
relations. Jessica Benjamin suggests that the bond between parent and child sets up a relationship in which one person—the parent—is always dominant, and the
other—the child—always submits. She attributes people's absorption with sadomasochistic role playing to their early desire (as children) to be recognized as the
parents' equal. Having failed at this, the child becomes invested in forms of recognition which are sadomasochistic: the sadist is always recognized, and the masochist is
always the bestower of recognition. In other words, sadomasochism is a crippled desire for mutuality, in which the

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 198

labor of recognition is divided up between two people. Certainly, as we find in Rice's work, the task of recognition can be traded back and forth between partners,
but "pleasure is still viewed as something to be negotiated within an acknowledged structure of power" (Williams 171).
Rice's work functions so exceptionally well as compensatory fantasy because she portrays all social roles as fluid and interchangeable. Yet, the identities meted out to
individuals within the family, gender, and the economy are often static: rarely do children have the power or the ability to abuse their parents; rarely do women
dominate men sexually as often as men dominate women sexually; and rarely do members of the underclass become wealthy capitalists. Her fantasies speak directly to
a painful problem people encounter in hierarchical culture, particularly when hierarchy makes possible sadomasochistic and abusive relationships. Rice's fictional
narratives offer fantasy compensation to readers who may feel themselves constrained by their identities, and particularly if their identities have made them vulnerable
to abuse. But the safe spaces in Rice's work, while they certainly offer a kind of liberation from constraining roles, tend to reproduce the abuser­abused binary. That
is, the "hook" in Rice's narratives is a fantasy of fluidity within hierarchy, rather than a fantasy of dismantling of hierarchy altogether.
Notes
1. I would point out, however, that in recent years (particularly during the late 1980s and early 1990s), s/m sexual gaming has entered the mainstream, and in
particular has become a hotly­debated issue among feminists. Post­feminist icon Madonna has represented herself in videos and her book Sex as a participant in s/m
scenarios, and feminist critics from Camille Paglia to Jessica Benjamin have acknowledged its importance for understanding contemporary sexual arrangements.
2. Anne Rice's book, The Feast of All Saints, tells a similar story, in which gendered and sexual ambiguity gets replaced by racial ambiguity. The characters in this
historical novel are all of mixed racial descent, and their fluid or dual identities seem to give them the same kinds of properties as Rice's bisexual characters (and, in
fact, some of the characters in Feast are bisexual). These mixed­race characters also challenge parental authority by simultaneously embodying it and rejecting it.
3. In "Family Romances," Freud writes that part of the structure of a "family romance" involves a child's search for a family "grander and more aristocratic" than his
own with which to identify. This is, Freud postulates, partly an act of revenge and partly an act of transcendence: "the child's imagination becomes engaged in the task
of getting free from the parents of whom he now has a low opinion and of replacing them by others who as a rule are of higher social standing" (Gay, The Freud
Reader 299). Freud is suggesting a connection between fantasies of upward mobility and revenge upon one's family.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 199

Works Cited
Benjamin, Jessica. The Bonds of Love: Psychoanalysis, Feminism, and the Problem of Domination. New York: Pantheon, 1988.
Butler, Judith. Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of Identity. New York: Routledge, 1990.
Chancer, Lynn. Sadomasochism in Everyday Life: The Dynamics of Power and Powerlessness. New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press, 1992.
Clover, Carol. Men, Women, and Chainsaws: Gender in the Modern Horror Film. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1992.
Dworkin, Andrea. Pornography: Men Possessing Women. New York: Plume, 1979.
Gay, Peter, ed. The Freud Reader. London: Norton, 1989.
Herman, Judith Lewis. Trauma and Recovery: The Aftermath of Violence—From Domestic Abuse to Political Terror. New York: Basic Books, 1992.
Jameson, Fredric. The Political Unconscious: Narrative as a Socially Symbolic Act. New York: Cornell University Press, 1981.
Modleski, Tania. Loving with a Vengeance: Mass­Produced Fantasies for Women. New York: Routledge, 1982.
Rice, Anne (writing as Anne Rampling). Belinda. New York: Jove, 1986.
Rice, Anne. (writing as A. N. Roquelaure). The Claiming of Sleeping Beauty. New York: Plume, 1983.
Rice, Anne. (writing as Anne Rampling). Cry to Heaven. New York: Pinnacle, 1982.
Rice, Anne. (writing as Anne Rampling). Exit to Eden. New York: Dell, 1985.
Rice, Anne (writing as Anne Rampling). The Feast Of All Saints. New York: Ballantine, 1979.
Rice, Anne (writing as Anne Rampling). Interview with the Vampire. New York: Ballantine, 1976.
Rice, Anne (writing as Anne Rampling). Lasher. New York: Knopf, 1993.
Rice, Anne (writing as Anne Rampling). The Queen of the Damned. New York: Ballantine, 1988.
Rice, Anne (writing as Anne Rampling). The Tale of the Body Thief. New York: Knopf, 1992.
Rice, Anne (writing as Anne Rampling). Taltos. New York: Knopf, 1994.
Rice, Anne (writing as Anne Rampling). The Vampire Lestat. New York: Ballantine, 1985.
Rice, Anne (writing as Anne Rampling). The Witching Hour. New York: Knopf, 1990.
Stoller, Robert J. Observing the Erotic Imagination. New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 1985.
Williams, Linda. Hard Core: Power, Pleasure, and the "Frenzy of the Visible." Berkeley: University of California Press, 1989.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 201

On Blues, Autobiography, and Performative Utterance: The Jouissance of Alberta Hunter
Kari J. Winter
Throughout the twentieth century, African American women blues artists have been rich sources of feminist and African American self­affirmation. Hazel Carby, in her
path­breaking essay "It Jus Be's Dat Way Sometimes: The Sexual Politics of Women's Blues," argues that because women blues singers have existed outside the pale
of respectability, they "frequently appear as liminal figures that play out and explore the various possibilities of a sexual existence; they are representations of women
who attempt to manipulate and control their construction as sexual subjects" (12). Building on Carby's analysis and focusing on the work of the great blues performer
Alberta Hunter, I will investigate three issues. First, does it make sense, in the context of blues culture, to connect writing to safety? Second, in what ways does
Alberta Hunter's work trouble the entrenched feminist belief that a woman artist's "I" is autobiographical (self­written, self­disclosing, and self­authorizing)? And finally,
if Alberta Hunter sought neither safety nor autobiographical expression, what did her artistry achieve for her?
Blues
In his influential essay, "The World and the Jug," Ralph Ellison signifies on the image of the world as an imprisoning jug:
[Irving] Howe seems to see segregation as an opaque steel jug with the Negroes inside waiting for some black messiah to come along and blow the cork. ... But if we are in a jug it
is transparent, not opaque, and one is allowed not only to see outside but to read what is going on out there; to make identifications as to values and human quality. (116)

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 202

If, as Ellison argues, liberal white northerners have seen blacks as trapped in a jug of racists' creation, African Americans have created self­empowering metaphors for
their lives even from within the prison of oppression. Ellison is playing with an image he inherited from a blues song written forty years earlier by Alberta Hunter. Called
"Down­Hearted Blues," the song launched both Hunter and Bessie Smith on the road to international fame in the 1920s. The song began: "Got the world in a jug, got
the stopper in my hand." While Ellison images the blues artist as trapped in a glass bottle, looking out to read the world and assign value, Hunter images the world as
trapped within a jug and the blues artist as the creator or at least the ruler of that jug. "[I]f you want me," Hunter sings, "you must come under my command."
At first glance, Hunter's conception of the power of the blues artist may seem overblown, romantic, and naive. She certainly was an unlikely candidate to claim such
power. Few childhoods appear more desolate than hers. Born black, female, and frail in Memphis in 1895, Alberta Hunter was abandoned by her father before she
was old enough to remember him. Her mother, Miss Laura, supported herself and her two daughters by working as a maid in a brothel. In later life, Hunter described
her childhood as haunted by neglect from her mother and mistreatment at the hands of men, ranging from the selfishness of a grandfather who ate "all the good chicken
and [left] us the feet and the neck" (Taylor 4) to sexual molestations and abuse by various men throughout her adolescence. Relatives and friends nicknamed her "Pig,"
alleging that she was always dirty. Hunter's response to suffering was twofold. First, she said that men's abuse "just made me stay away from men" (Taylor 14).
Second, familial injustice made her "want to go to the top and stay there" (Taylor 5).
Hunter succeeded in both determinations. For the rest of her life, she resisted men's sexual advances and committed herself to lesbian friendships. She made it to the
top of the blues music industry by becoming one of the most creative blues artists of this century. As music critic Melvin Maddocks observes, "of all the blues singers,
Alberta Hunter may have been the most versatile" (23). Hunter's career as a blues performer spanned seventy years. At the age of seventeen, she ran away to
Chicago and began singing in bordellos. Before long, she had worked her way up to night clubs like the Dreamland and then began touring nationally. Like most jazz
musicians, she flourished on improvisation. Her approach to writing lyrics appeared casual; "different little things would come to me that rhymed," she explained
offhandedly (Taylor 53). She wrote songs successfully for decades, but she was more possessive about what she called her "tricks" and "style" than her lyrics.
Hunter's inimitable style had a formative impact on the development of blues music in the crucial decade of the 1920s, when she began selling her songs to other artists
as well as recording them herself. She sang throughout

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 203

the United States, Europe, and Asia in the 1930s and 1940s. When her singing career ebbed in the 1950s, she demonstrated her skill at improvisation by deciding to
become a licensed practical nurse, even though she was sixty years old and had never finished elementary school. She took equivalency examinations in 1955 in
Chicago and applied to nursing school, secretly shaving twelve years off of her age. She succeeded. After twenty­two years of devoted nursing, Hunter was forced to
retire in 1977 because the hospital personnel office thought she was seventy years old. She was actually eighty­two. Never one to give up, Hunter went to New York
to launch her second musical career. She became more popular and famous than ever before. She was particularly pleased when "her" President Jimmy Carter asked
her to sing in the White House. She sustained her second international singing career until her death in 1984, at the age of eighty­nine.
One remarkable aspect of Hunter's career is how much she endangered herself—that is, literally put her life at risk—in order to make money and to sing. At the age of
sixteen, Hunter was so physically underdeveloped that she could travel on trains on a child's pass, which is exactly what she did when she ran away from Memphis to
Chicago. Learning quickly that working as a maid or restaurant drudge would trap her permanently in poverty, Hunter decided to sing. For months she was routinely
thrown out of the brothel where she aspired to perform. She had to fight not only to claim an audience but also to avoid omnipresent pimps. Once her career was
launched, she was at risk from police raids, pickpockets, confidence men, and thugs. One night at a blues bar in Chicago, the lights went out and when they came
back on, Hunter discovered that a man sitting near her had been shot. In 1922 when Hunter went on a southern tour, "the body of a young black boy, lynched
because he supposedly talked back to a white man, was thrown into the lobby of a theatre where she was to appear" (Taylor 52).
The danger Hunter faced throughout her life was not atypical; it was part and parcel of everyday life for most African Americans. Writing and singing could be
associated with safety only in very limited, particular ways. Since its origins in the eighteenth century, African American writing has been connected primarily to
freedom and to the decolonizing of identity—processes undertaken at tremendous risk. In a historical context where literacy was outlawed, African Americans who
wrote literally endangered their lives with the same strokes whereby they claimed ownership of their lives. After formal emancipation in 1864, art continued to be a
danger­ridden activity. As James Baldwin puts it, the blues artist risks "ruin, destruction, madness, and death, in order to find new ways to make us listen" (86). In
Baldwin's formulation, the blues artist encourages his or her listeners "to leave the shoreline and strike out for the deep water" (85). Safety is invoked only in the sense
that the artist stands as "witness that deep water and drowning [are] not the same thing" (85).

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 204

African American cultural theorists widely agree that the blues infuse the heart and soul of African American culture. Houston Baker defines the blues as the matrix of
African American discourse, the fertile womb of "ceaseless input and output, a web of intersecting, crisscrossing impulses always in productive transit ... the multiplex,
enabling script in which Afro­American cultural discourse is inscribed" (3–4). Resisting unitary or binary ideological narratives, Baker argues, the blues refuse "to be
pinned down to any final, dualistic significance. Even as they speak of paralyzing absence and ineradicable desire, their instrumental rhythms suggest change,
movement, action, continuance, unlimited and unending possibility" (8). In Alberta Hunter's blues, the lyrics as well as the instrumentals often empower the singer
toward feminist self­affirmation, agency, movement, and change. For example, in "I've Got a Mind to Ramble" (written in 1949 and first recorded in New Jersey,
January 11, 1950), Hunter expresses an angry determination to leave a humiliating love affair. She describes how gossip is circulating "all over town" because the
higher she tries to raise her lover, the lower he tries ''to drag [her] down." Fed up with begging him to mend his "low­down dirty ways," she has made up her mind to
leave. In face of his disbelief that she will actually leave, she responds, "Just count the days I'm gone."
In case the no­count triflin' man didn't get the point, Hunter drives it home in multilingual play in her song "I've Had Enough" (alternately named "I'm Tired of Being
Your Football" and "Alberta's Blues"; written around 1978 and recorded in New York, July 28, 1981, when Hunter was eighty­six years old). After declaring that she
has had enough of being kicked around like a football, the singer expresses her determination to leave on the nine o'clock train. She concludes with verbal fireworks,
displaying the six languages—Italian, French, Danish, Yiddish, German, and English—that she was proud to sing in and adding a little Japanese for good measure: "If I
never, ever, see you again, brother, / Good­bye. Or, sayonara. Au revoir. See ya see ya" and so on—multilingual excess sure to intimidate many a brother. In this
song, as in many others, Hunter participates in the blues philosophy that, resisting Master Narratives, inspires energies that undermine, bypass, subvert, and exceed
patriarchal logic.
Defining the blues as mournful music about victimization is a common but uninformed mistake. Through multiple artistic media such as music, writing, and painting, the
blues articulate a hard­won affirmation of life and self. The blues artist "fill[s] the air with life," with his or her own life, which the artist understands contains the lives of
many other people as well (Baldwin 140). Through the blues, Baldwin argues, the artist and the audience lament the tragedies of their lives, but also discover "how we
could cease lamenting" (140). Freedom is imagined and expressed in the blues: the audience finds freedom through listening and the artist finds freedom when the
audience

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 205

listens, in a reciprocal movement. Blues theorists have shown that blues art must be created afresh every generation because "reaffirmation is precisely the contingency
upon which the very survival of man as human being, however normally unsatisfied and abnormally wretched, is predicated" (Murray 6).
In his influential essay on Richard Wright's autobiographical masterpiece Black Boy, Ralph Ellison defines the blues as "an impulse to keep the painful details and
episodes of a brutal experience alive in one's aching consciousness, to finger its jagged grain, and to transcend it, not by the consolation of philosophy but by squeezing
from it a near­tragic, near­comic lyricism. As a form, the blues is an autobiographical chronicle of personal catastrophe expressed lyrically" (78–79). Every piece of
this definition signally illuminates the achievement of blues artists like Richard Wright. It may also work well to describe the music of a mournful singer like Billie
Holiday. However, unlike Wright or Holiday, most African American women who have sung the blues have joined feminist politics with the transformative powers of
the blues matrix. Part of their power, I would argue, comes from their insistence on exceeding what Ellison calls "an autobiographical chronicle of personal
catastrophe." To understand why women artists empowered themselves by stepping outside of autobiography, we need to re­examine the feminist quest to tell a free
story.
Feminism and Autobiography
The history of women's writing as we know it is a history of struggle against patriarchal scripts that inscribe women in silence. In the recent wave of the feminist
movement, classic texts from Anglo­American and French feminists have continually exhorted women to claim their voices and write their stories. For example, in her
inspiring 1976 essay, "The Laugh of the Medusa," Hélène Cixous declares:
Woman must write her self: must write about women and bring women to writing, from which they have been driven away as violently as from their bodies—for the same reasons,
by the same law, with the same fatal goal. Woman must put herself into the text—as into the world and into history—by her own movement. (245)

Similarly, in 1980, in Diving Deep and Surfacing, Carol Christ called on women to write their stories because "Women's stories have not been told. ... Without
stories she cannot understand herself" (1). Responding to these and other feminist calls during the past two decades, thousands of women around the world have
gotten personal and political through writing autobiographically.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 206

What, then, did Shoshana Felman mean when she asserted in 1993 that "none of us, as women, has as yet, precisely, an autobiography" (14)?
In What Does a Woman Want? Felman cautions against what she calls "the mere stylistic trend" of "getting personal" in one's writing. She argues:
"Getting personal" does not guarantee that the story we narrate is wholly ours or that it is narrated in our own voice. ... Trained to see ourselves as objects and to be positioned as
the Other, estranged to ourselves, we have a story that by definition cannot be self­present to us, a story that, in other words, is not a story, but must become a story. (14)

Felman continues her provocative analysis by arguing that women can engender or access their stories only indirectly, through "the bond of reading, that is, through
the story of the Other (the story read by other women, the story of other women, the story of women told by others)" (14). She suggests that women need to
conjugate "literature, theory, and autobiography together through the act of reading and by reading, thus, at once our sexual difference and our autobiography as
missing" (14). Like Felman, I believe that feminists need to problematize our current, often untheorized enthusiasm for autobiography. Because our identities have been
written in and by patriarchal scripts, telling the stories of our lives is not necessarily a liberating act. We may, almost as if by instinct, compulsively repeat femininity or
rewrite ourselves as men. As Felman asks, "from where should we exorcise this male mind, if we ourselves are possessed by it?" (5). Following Felman, I would
argue that we must return to the site of possession—that is, we must read and reread the stories that have written us. Before we can write ourselves out of determined
and determining patriarchal scripts, we must teach ourselves to read differently, vigorously, and dangerously.
Although not an academic theorist, Alberta Hunter found her own ways—in a hurry and at a very young age—to read, reread, and theorize about patriarchal, white
supremacist scripts. She saw that marriage and fame were mutually exclusive for women, and she chose fame (Taylor 15). With characteristic pragmatism and a
determination to forge success in a tremendously unjust world, Hunter recognized the futility in her context of testifying to sexual abuse. As she said near the end of her
life,
People think a child is a liar. Children can scream and cry and do everything to try to impress the person of the fact that they are being mistreated, that they're not lying, and still,
they would not be believed. It's a crime. Oh, it's a crime. (Taylor 14)

Whereas Richard Wright was able to chronicle his personal catastrophes in lyrical form and to find an audience, Hunter had stories to tell that the world

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 207

was not ready to hear in her lifetime. The way she created safety for herself was not by baring her soul but by protecting her privacy:
I never shared my private life with anybody in the world, not even with my mother. I've always been a loner. The only thing that anyone knew about my private life was what they
tried to guess. But nobody ever knew. I never sat around and told stories on myself. (Taylor 30)

Although this personal privacy contradicts the narrative trajectory of late twentieth­century feminist models of healing and wholeness, Hunter created a woman­
centered private life (she sustained several sequential long­term lesbian relationships and supported her mother through old age) at the same time that she created a
rewarding artistic career. Her achievement dramatizes the non­identity—the shifting identities—of she who was written, she who reads, she who writes, and she who
sings. If Hunter had attempted to integrate her various private and public selves into one single, sexually­specific, sincere, "realistic" self, her ability to perform would
have been inhibited and her musical legacy impoverished.
A problem that undermines many feminist attempts to tell a free story and to author a free self is that women writers have often failed to free themselves imaginatively
from the phallocentric ideal of a unified self. "Integration," "authenticity," and "wholeness" have been catchwords of liberal feminist self­concepts. I argue that far from
being free, this unified self, this "I" of autobiography, tends to be constrained and contained in a patriarchal, self­indulgent solipsism. We need to author new concepts
of self that take bliss in multiplicity. The power of Emily Dickinson and Emily Brontë, for example, stems from their non­identity with the voices and personae of their
writing; they write themselves in multiple voices and figures not contained in autobiographical facts. Such, too, is the case of Alberta Hunter. She cannot be limited to a
singular voice; she imagines into existence countless voices and infinite possibilities.
Despite Hunter's remarkable accomplishment, only one book (a biography), a handful of scholarly articles, and a few documentary videos have been published
analyzing her work. The relative inattention granted to Hunter compared to a singer like Billie Holiday may stem, it seems to me, from the fact that Holiday was as
dramatic in her tragic failure as a drug and alcohol addict as she was gifted in her musical performances. In many ways, Holiday's early death serves as a warning and
punishment for transgressions, in step with the discourse repeatedly aimed at African Americans in the recent decades of the "wars on drugs" and "just say no"
reductive moralism. In contrast to Billie Holiday, Alberta Hunter's long, successful, exuberant life suggests that transgression does sometimes pay. Her transgressive
conduct does not fit stereotypes

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 208

of black behavior. Asked her secret to longevity, Hunter replied: "Lookit, honey, I never smoked, drank, cussed, took drugs, owed nobody nothin' and never did
musical exercises to warm up. All I ever did is open my mouth and sing" (Taylor 267). She took care of her voice, got plenty of rest, travelled around the world when
she felt like it, and kept a low profile except when performing. She had a reputation for being tight with money and taking care of business. She did not break rules
carelessly; she was a disciplined worker and a strong­willed rebel who did things deliberately the way she believed they ought to be done—breaking rules on principle
and for good reason.
The primary social conventions Alberta Hunter set out to break were the narrative conventions that told blacks and women how to lead their lives. After witnessing the
desperately circumscribed lives that white American society assigned to blacks and experiencing molestations as a child, Hunter was determined to create new life
stories for herself. She recalled "losing" men to other women. With the ironic twist that characterizes much of Hunter's speech and music, she lamented the way other
women took her men away: "Oh, I lost them all. Oh, Lord. God is so good. They got their marriage. And I got the fame." Having rejected the marriage plot, Hunter
then rejected idealizing images of motherhood, saying: "No, I'm glad I don't have to sit around and hold them babies. No, Lord, look at me, stepping off one plane and
getting on another, going up, up, up. But I love children. I like them, but I don't want them around me" (Taylor 15). Hunter provided a home for her mother, made
women friends the sexual centers of her life, and developed long­lasting friendships with male musicians. Most importantly, she devoted herself to living and singing
new stories. Positioning herself as a blues messiah, Hunter explained: "The story is love. A lot of people need it and want it badly but they haven't had it. ... It's a great
pleasure to be able to spread love and to be a participant in it, to be one of the messengers. I came to bring a message and I'm trying to deliver that message. I'm
waiting for you to accept it" (''Alberta Hunter" 252).
III. Performative Blues
If Alberta Hunter did not author an "autobiographical chronicle of personal catastrophe" or strive to express an authentic, integrated self, what did she achieve in her
blues performances? The safety she created for herself was the kind of safety that comes from financial stability. The freedom and power that she claimed were the
freedom and power that come from giving voice not necessarily to autobiographical "facts" but to the entire human range of emotions and selves. How good it is to
sing and dance, at the age of nineteen, at the age of eighty­three. Whereas Ellison's invisible man keeps searching for

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Page 209

his illusory "I/eye," Hunter shows little interest in an autobiographical "I." She desires to bring on stage a performing, performative "I'' whose very presence is the sign
of her triumph.
In July 1922 Alberta Hunter recorded the first song that she herself wrote. As mentioned above, the song was called "Down­Hearted Blues." When Bessie Smith
selected it for her first recording, it sold over a million copies, making both Bessie and the song famous. Hunter herself continued singing "Down­Hearted Blues" for
sixty years, and she said that she collected royalties on all recordings of it for the rest of her life. Hunter was twenty­seven years old in 1922 and squeezing out a
precarious living from various jobs. She was invited to New York for a recording session for the first time that summer. When she wrote "Got the world in a jug, got
the stopper in my hand," she was not reporting a pre­existing truth. The lines did not function as a description of autobiographical reality. Rather, "Down­Hearted
Blues" functioned performatively as a speech act to bring a new reality into being. In the beginning was the Word—or, as J. L. Austin puts it, "to utter the sentence (in,
of course, the appropriate circumstances) is not to describe my doing...: it is to do it" (6). By singing "got the world in a jug," Hunter put the world in her jug.
In place of the anger and vengeance that Richard Wright so forcefully expresses and in place of the Oedipal struggle to kill the Father that Ellison's invisible man enacts
and later rejects, Alberta Hunter positions herself in her music as what Roland Barthes would call an "intractable lover." Hunter described her jazz this way:
Personally, it means to do unto others as I wish to be done to at all times. It's my music, I love it. I can touch a person. I can touch different people that never paid any attention to
me before through my jazz. Yeah, touching. It's a language. Jazz has a language all its own. Naturally it's an expression of love. ("Alberta Hunter" 251)

As Barthes has shown, love (jouissance) is an anti­ideological force that cannot be manufactured, governed, managed, or directed; it tends to slip away just when one
catches on to it and to explode just when one thinks it has been contained. Love is unruly, gratuitous, excessive, and serendipitous; it is not easily manipulated,
placated, or cured. While anger and protest make one tired, love unleashes energy (Barthes 23).
Barthes observes that in love there is sometimes an "explosion of language during which the subject manages to annul the loved object under the volume of love itself:
by a specifically amorous perversion, it is love the subject loves, not the object ... it is my desire I desire, and the loved being is no more than its tool" (31). In Hunter's
music, she performs multiple fictive heterosexual postures:

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/11/2020 7:38 AM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

