Life Writing

ISSN: 1448-4528 (Print) 1751-2964 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rlwr20

Venues of Storytelling: the circulation of testimony
in human rights campaigns
Kay Schaffer & Sidonie Smith
To cite this article: Kay Schaffer & Sidonie Smith (2004) Venues of Storytelling: the circulation of
testimony in human rights campaigns, Life Writing, 1:2, 3-26, DOI: 10.1080/10408340308518258
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/10408340308518258

Published online: 08 May 2007.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 235

View related articles

Citing articles: 2 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rlwr20

Schaffer-Smith.qxd

7/09/2004

1:55 PM

Page 3

Venues of Storytelling: the circulation of
testimony in human rights campaigns
| Kay Schaffer and Sidonie Smith
Abstract
Personal storytelling has become critical in contemporary
human rights campaigns. Personal stories are narrated to
remember a past that has been forgotten; to begin a healing
process between tellers and listeners; to bring rights violations
to a global audience; to put a human face on suffering; to
mobilise and fund activism. Global audiences gain access to the
suffering and struggles of people elsewhere through published
life narratives, narratives such as Nobel Peace Prize winner
Rigoberta Menchú's I, Rigoberta Menchú: an Indian woman in
Guatemala or Australian Jan Ruff-O’Herne's 50 Years of Silence.
Yet, personal storytelling takes place not only in the form of
published life narratives but also in multiple and diverse venues
where readers and listeners become witnesses to human rights
violations and campaigns, ‘in the second person’. In this essay,
we consider in more detail seven such sites: fact-finding in the
field; handbooks and websites; nationally based human rights
commissions; human rights commission reports; collections of
testimonies; stories in the media; and other scattered venues
through which narratives circulate.

SINCE THE 1980s, as a number of cultural critics have noted, the
‘memoir boom’ has contributed toward a greater understanding of
human rights abuse around the world (see, for example, Gilmore;
Schaffer and Smith). Numerous life narratives attest to the resistance
and resilience of individuals and groups as they struggle for freedom,
justice and dignity. Some texts, like I, Rigoberta Menchú: an Indian
woman in Guatemala, called the world’s attention to the plight of the
Life Writing | Vol 1, No 2 | 2004 | pp 3–26

Schaffer-Smith.qxd

7/09/2004

1:55 PM

Page 4

Life Writing | Vol 1, No 2

Quiché Indians and their battle against a repressive state. As the
narrative circulated, particularly in the United States and amongst
Indigenous populations elsewhere, it spurred activism and led to a
successful human rights campaign that eventually brought an end to
state-sponsored massacres and an increased respect for Mayan
culture. In many instances, life stories serve as lightning rods for
activism as the local and global transits of storytelling interpenetrate
and enfold within an evolving human rights regime. While
acknowledging the importance of the published life narrative in
promoting an awareness of human rights, in this paper we want to
consider in some detail other venues in which testimony is elicited
and life stories are told.We consider the production, circulation and
reception of personal testimony within the field of human rights with
reference to seven sites — each with their own indeterminate
capacities to promote, but also to constrain, advocacy, activism and
redress: fact-finding in the field; handbooks and websites; nationally
based human rights commissions; human rights commission reports;
collections of testimonies; stories in the media; and other scattered
venues through which narratives circulate.
Fact-finding in the field
On the ground, incidences and circumstances of human rights
violations require documentation before United Nations-sponsored
investigations and processes of redress can be initiated. UN
rapporteurs and working groups, representatives of nongovernment organisations (NGOs) and other advocacy groups, and
claimants themselves gather information on location in order to
accumulate credible and reliable data about violations and to build a
case that can be presented to an official body established to study,
recognise and, perhaps, adjudicate rights violations. Often coming
together across national boundaries, groups of activists form
alliances to publicise issues and to seek redress for rights violations.
As a case accumulates — through attention, testimony, documentation,
fact-based argument, moral suasion — its human rights dimensions
sharpen into a campaign that becomes international in scope.
4

Schaffer-Smith.qxd

7/09/2004

1:55 PM

Page 5

Kay Schaffer and Sidonie Smith | Venues of Storytelling

Information-gathering takes many forms. Fact-finders seek
information in and through heterogeneous sources, among them
legislation, court opinions, ordinances, regulations, newspaper
articles, government reports, photographs, documentary evidence
and reports by local NGOs. They gather evidence from personal
testimony found in letters, affidavits, depositions, video footage and
interviews. Lawyers observe trials and interview witnesses
(Ravindran, Guzman et al. 1994, 12–20).This process of fact-finding
and documentation is followed by the preparation of documentary
statements, sometimes in the form of a letter of concern to be
directed toward authorities within a country, sometimes in the form
of a major report to be published and circulated in national and
international arenas.
For advocates, the goal of fact-finding is to provide credible and
reliable data about rights abuses, since, in a juridical frame, there can
be no case without evidence, and that evidence must stand up to
cross-examination. Mindful of the demands of the adjudicating
frameworks in which testimony is presented and received, activists
must approach testimony through the methods of positivistic social
science research, applying principles of rationality and tests of
truthfulness and authentication, and seeking corroborative evidence
that protects against the unreliability of individual memory. Further,
they must conform the case to defined violations deriving from the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) or United Nations
conventions ratified by the nation in which the violations took place
or to which the perpetrators belonged.
Charged with the responsibility for interviewing claimants, rights
advocates in the field assume the status of ‘professionals’, coming
from elsewhere. Implicitly, this positioning makes professional
activists the objective arbiters of a rights claim and the claimant a
victim and object of fact-finding.1 As ‘judges of narrative’ in the
juridical sense, advocates are enjoined to determine the truth-value
of the testimony they collect, evidentiary testimony they cannot
assume to be true.2 In most cases, therefore, a witness’s story has to
be corroborated through the testimony of others, family members
and strangers among them. In the case of torture victims, doctors
5

Schaffer-Smith.qxd

7/09/2004

1:55 PM

Page 6

Life Writing | Vol 1, No 2

may be called in to make determinative judgments based on their
reading of embodied behavior and causes for markings on the body.
In this way, the mute evidence of the body serves as corroboration
for the truth-status of the narrative.
Personal testimony, understood and judged unproblematically as
evidentiary, turns the speaker into a victim and moulds his or her
story into a case history, a piece of positivist evidence, with attendant
gains and losses. The primary gain comes with the legitimating of
individual loss and suffering, and the embedding of the individual
story in a larger story of human rights violations for the purposes of
building a case and motivating action.The constraining aspects of the
practices of fact-finding are several.The need to build a credible case
renders the individual story less important than the accumulation of
many stories of violation, told in a certain way, and told again and
again. The high level of concern about the reliability and credibility
of ‘oral information’ in fact-finding and documentation means that
the affects attached to recollections of pain and suffering become
particularly suspect, and are treated as potentially subversive to the
project at hand (Thoolen and Verstappen 1986, 19).There is pressure
to conform the ‘messiness’ of personal testimony to the protocols for
codification of a human rights abuse, to contain it within a
standardised, often chronological, format. Such a format more easily
addresses the series of questions the inquiry has established as critical
to the goal of documenting a particular human rights issue, and
subsumes local knowledge and conceptual frameworks for
understanding different cultural experiences and traditions to the
national and international frameworks of human rights law. Finally,
the reduction of testimony, of remembered experience, to evidence,
judged either as purely factual or mendacious, obscures the ways in
which narratives of suffering offer bits of evidence that cannot easily
be reduced to evidence (Hesford and Kozol 2001, 5).
Handbooks and websites
Handbooks, published documents and (more recently) websites offer
other sites for personal narrating in the context of human rights
struggles. Documents and websites have multiple uses and appeals.
6

Schaffer-Smith.qxd

7/09/2004

1:55 PM

Page 7

Kay Schaffer and Sidonie Smith | Venues of Storytelling

Some handbooks incorporate the voices of witnesses, victims and
survivors to frame and offer vivid reporting on specific human rights
violations. The 1991 Amnesty International Handbook, for instance,
incorporates first-person testimony in the introductions to chapters
on specific domains of rights abuses. Here the introduction of the
personal voice functions in ways distinct from the uses of personal
narrative in the context of documentation. Directed toward people
who might be persuaded to work on behalf of human rights
campaigns, the Amnesty International Handbook utilises personal
testimony in order to engage potential human rights advocates. In
particular, it serves as a means to recruit and train possible Amnesty
International members, sponsors and activists, encouraging them to
‘be part of the action’.
Websites now enable globally based advocates around the world
to attract local rights activists and victims of human rights violations
and give them a voice. One such website, Witness
(www.witness.org), pioneered innovative strategies for
strengthening advocacy through the use of digital technologies.
Established by an unusual blend of celebrity, professional and
commercial interests, bringing together British musician and activist
Peter Gabriel, the United Nations Lawyers Committee for Human
Rights and the Reebok Human Rights Foundation, the site offers
training in collecting testimony in local communities, documentarymaking for an international audience and video streaming for
grassroots advocacy. It also advises visitors on how to use the site for
public service announcements and how to prepare formal testimony
for use at an international tribunal.
With a variety of low-tech (text-based) and high-tech (video
streaming) interactions, Witness offers maximum flexibility for
people in less developed and/or remote rural areas to gather
evidence and tell their stories.The organisation loans camcorders to
groups otherwise without access to digital technologies and offers
on-site, on location and hands-on virtual training for activists and
victims of human rights violations.3 At the receiving end, highcapability on-line viewers gain immediate access to minidocumentaries made by locally based advocates from around the
7

Schaffer-Smith.qxd

7/09/2004

1:55 PM

Page 8

Life Writing | Vol 1, No 2

world. In 2002 the website featured seventeen short video
documentaries, among them stories of refugees in Senegal,
massacres in Sierra Leone, genocide in Rwanda and the international
trafficking of girls and women. Professionally edited and introduced
by celebrity supporters like Susan Sarandon,Tim Robbins, Lou Reed
and Laurie Anderson, the mini-documentaries allow viewers to
engage with the issues, access additional information and take action
through petitions and protests directed at those in authority via
internet links.
When testimony circulates through human rights handbooks and
websites to transnational audiences, it helps build coalitions and
extend spheres of suasion. For website users, stories make an
affective appeal, often through the inclusion of provocative and
personalising visual images. They arouse compassion for victims of
rights violations. Told through Amnesty International or other
Western venues, the stories also enhance the credibility and
reputations of such organisations as central, and successful,
champions of human rights. These latter effects matter in the
recruitment of volunteers. In the context of human rights handbooks
and websites, then, personal narratives personalise statistics,
motivate grassroots activity, compel readers and potential volunteers
to action, and raise money through humanitarian appeals.
Website initiatives like Witness are not without detractors. Some
critics contend that the new relation between aesthetics, commerce
and politics puts a ‘humane’ corporate face on human rights issues
that contradicts the resistant identities of human rights victims.
Others argue that human rights websites like Witness provide access
for some but not all victims, setting up competition between
claimants and producing a polarisation of ‘infocrats’ and ‘cyber
paupers’ (Havemann 2000, 25). Paul Havemann further cautions that
the infotainment format of websites can turn the ground of suffering
into web-surfer spectacle. Most importantly, uneven access to
technology enables the consolidation of global hierarchies of power
based not only on gender, ethnicity, class and region but also
increasingly on differential access to technology, particularly
between North and South America, and between Europe, Asia and
Africa (2000, 25). Nonetheless, new media technologies extend the
8

Schaffer-Smith.qxd

7/09/2004

1:55 PM

Page 9

Kay Schaffer and Sidonie Smith | Venues of Storytelling

scope for the production of testimony, sustaining new social
movements and styles of political activism. They engage victims on
the local level in ways that help to destabilise state power and build
transformative transnational alliances, albeit in uneven, contingent
and unpredictable ways.
Human rights commissions and tribunals
Multiple platforms of human rights activism also provide
opportunities for victims of rights abuses to testify before nationally
based human rights commissions, UN-based tribunals and
rapporteurs, and activist-sponsored tribunals and hearings. Pressure
from the international community or from shifts in political power
inside a nation can prompt governments and statutory bodies in
reluctant nations to establish formal commissions of inquiry. The
most prominent of these forums involve truth commissions, like
those conducted in the 1990s in a number of Latin American
countries; truth and reconciliation commissions, like those held in
postcolonial nations like South Africa, Canada and Australia; and
international World Court Tribunals conducted at The Hague, like
those investigating the genocidal wars in Rwanda, Uganda and
Bosnia. Often these inquiries are established only after years of
pressure from defendant or victim groups within the nation. Often
they delve into areas of human rights abuse buried in the nation’s
history and memory.
Once commissions, tribunals or hearings are called, public
discourse begins to ‘catalyse’ private discourse, ‘send[ing] out the
message’, suggests Peter Novick, that ‘“This is something you should
be talking about”’ (1999, 107). Such forums allow previously
silenced voices to be heard in new legitimating contexts.Yet, when
witnesses give themselves over to UN and NGO protocols and
processes, they give their stories over to institutional shaping. As a
result, a great deal can be lost to them.
In becoming the legal subjects of human rights within a national
inquiry, witnesses participate in, and thus reinforce, the legal
structures of the nation, paradoxically effecting an exclusion of
recognition of the different laws, customs and protocols that operate
9

Schaffer-Smith.qxd

7/09/2004

1:55 PM

Page 10

Life Writing | Vol 1, No 2

in their distinct and separate cultures. For example, in cases of First
Nations peoples, spiritual affiliations with land, relations within
family and kinship networks, and guardianship over secret and sacred
knowledge built up through oral traditions, rituals and spiritual
practices, all ontologically foundational to speakers, cannot be
accommodated by human rights protocols. To tell a story consonant
with group traditions requires a different voice, the ‘we’ of a group
narrative; a different structure that might seem fragmented and
discontinuous; a different logic of connection to place, not time; and
a different speaking position in which agency and self-conscious
reflection is subsumed by a collective ‘we’ (Attwood and Macgowan
2001, xiv). These group imperatives can be overwritten when
personal stories are transformed into testimony in preparation for an
official inquiry. Further, tribunals and commissions exercise a ‘will to
know’ about the buried past. They operate on the assumption that
people, when given the occasion, will and should want to tell their
stories. This presumption occludes the cultural rights of potential
witnesses who may need to protect themselves, their community,
their history and their secret knowledges by remaining silent (see
Povinelli 2002).
Entering the arena of an official inquiry or tribunal, witnesses and
their advocates are also constrained by legal norms of argument.
When Japanese Americans sought reparative justice through the US
Congress for their internment during the Second World War, they
sought to argue their case as a group on the grounds of systemic and
structural ethnic discrimination. At the tribunal, lawyers for the
claimants tried to introduce social and systemic arguments
concerning long-term discrimination of one group (the Japanese
American plaintiffs who had been interned during the war) by
another group (the American Government). Tribunal officials
excluded these arguments, however; instead, plaintiff lawyers had to
present their plaintiffs in purely legal terms as individuals seeking
individual damages. In this process, individual plaintiffs could not tell
stories of differential war experiences or claim differential
reparations. Paradoxically, then, those individuals making claims
before the tribunal had to present themselves at once as individuals
and as ‘representatives’ of the group, and mount a case that effaced
10

Schaffer-Smith.qxd

7/09/2004

1:55 PM

Page 11

Kay Schaffer and Sidonie Smith | Venues of Storytelling

the differential experiences of individuals within the group. In other
words, only certain kinds of stories of injustice could be told and
legitimated within the tribunal’s terms of reference. On the one
hand, Japanese Americans won their case and gained reparations
because, as Eric Yamamoto contends, they were able to frame their
case tightly within the American law/Enlightenment paradigm of
individual rights (1998, 493, 498). On the other hand, rather than
challenging universal principles that exclude differences, these
processes strengthened the political integrity and efficacy of the
system of law that the claims themselves contested.
In the context of tribunals and truth and reconciliation
commissions, not all stories can be told. For example, Hilary
Charlesworth and Christine Chinkin, addressing specifically
gendered violations, contend that international human rights law ‘has
retained the deeper, gendered, public/private distinction’ that
obscures and overlooks women’s experiences of rights violations
because human rights law has understood ‘women’s lives’ as
‘generally conducted within the sphere deemed outside the scope of
international law, indeed also often outside the ambit of “private”
(national) law’ (2000, 69).Thus, until the emergence of international
outrage at the systematic rape of women during the Bosnian war as
a form of ethnic cleansing, women’s stories of sexual violation have
been particularly vulnerable to exclusion. Islamic women living in
fundamentalist nations also suffer disadvantage in relation to
bringing charges of sexual violence to public account, having little
recourse to the religious Shari’a courts and being under obligation to
protect the honor of their fathers and brothers. Moreover, any
testimony they might give jeopardises their position of respect and
belonging within their community.Although rape and other forms of
violence against women have been recognised as war crimes since
the Versailles Treaty of 1919, prosecutions have been rare (Brown and
Grenfell 2003, 348). In the aftermath of the Bosnian war, several
international UN-sponsored forums, including the Vienna World
Conference on Human Rights (1993) and the Fourth International
Conference on Women held in Beijing (1995), passed resolutions
that focused world attention on rape as a war crime and a
11

Schaffer-Smith.qxd

7/09/2004

1:55 PM

Page 12

Life Writing | Vol 1, No 2

fundamental violation of women’s human rights. More recently,
gender-based persecution and rape have been classified as crimes
against humanity in the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court (1998).The international conferences facilitated the gathering
of testimony of former Second World War sex prisoners, presented
at the Japanese War Crimes Tribunal hearings, and of Bosnian
victims, whose documentaries were prepared for presentation at the
International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) at
The Hague. In the latter case, former military officers received jail
sentences, albeit minimal, for participation in the systematic rape of
women. Still, as demonstrated by the South African Truth and
Reconciliation Commission (TRC), where few raped or sexually
abused women testified on their own behalf — whether because
their violations were deemed to fall outside the political mandate of
the commission or for fear of shaming or reprisal — patriarchal
relations on a local level and legal definitions of gender-based abuse
as ‘domestic’ or private continue to constrain women to positions of
silence.
At their best, hearings and tribunals become sites where some
aspects of national histories of progress and modernity are
countered, contested and contradicted by stories presenting a
counter-history of conquest, dispossession, oppression and
discrimination on the one hand, and (always limited) forms of
resistance and self-determination on the other. Truth and
reconciliation commissions and rights tribunals also offer
opportunities, both individual and collective, to heal the lingering
wounds of injustice and to project a new future of reconciliation and,
sometimes, reparations. Commissions rarely, however, lead to a
national will to make more than symbolic gestures toward apology
and limited material reparation. Their terms of reference and
protocols for presentation reproduce exclusionary norms that
perpetuate the silencing of many stories of difference.
Human rights commission reports
Oral testimony, heard, broadcast and recorded at commissions and
hearings, creates an ever-broader public attentive to human rights
12

Schaffer-Smith.qxd

7/09/2004

1:55 PM

Page 13

Kay Schaffer and Sidonie Smith | Venues of Storytelling

violations and the narratives of inquiry witnesses. Individual stories,
presented at tribunals, are subsequently reported in newspapers and
on radio and television. They are mounted on websites, circulating
nationally but also more broadly through international networks and
meshworks4 of advocacy.The testimonies of Indigenous witnesses to
the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission (HREOC)
inquiry in Australia were put on the Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islanders Commission (ATSIC) website; the testimonies of witnesses
to the TRC in South Africa were mounted on the African National
Congress (ANC) website. Archived on human rights advocacy
websites, commission hearings can be accessed by interested parties
for future reference.
Inquiries also produce and circulate, in hard copy and digital
formats, official reports that document the findings of human rights
claims.The HREOC and TRC reports in Australia and South Africa,
for instance, were widely distributed free-of-charge to Indigenous
and black communities in their respective countries.The publication
of an official report (online or in print) ensures that stories remain
in circulation, providing a counter-history to national narratives that
elide histories of violence, exploitation and the degradation of some
of the nation’s subjects; and projecting new cultural and national
alignments of belonging, ownership and custodianship consonant
with the restorative aims of the commissions.
Official reports document the legacy of the past for readers in the
present. Sometimes, as in the case of the truth commissions in South
America, where intentions are retributive, commission reports
contain little testimony from victims. In an attempt to restore social
and political stability to the nation, the reports sanitise the abuses of
the past and issue summative accounts of punishments to
perpetrators of past violations. When the intent of a commission is
restorative, as in the case of the TRC in South Africa, and of the
Canadian, New Zealand and Australian inquiries into Indigenous
rights, commission reports can include testimony to provide a
ground for active processes of reconciliation in the future.
Commissioners direct their findings to a national audience, often
with an intention of healing and reconciliation. In such cases, the
13

Schaffer-Smith.qxd

7/09/2004

1:55 PM

Page 14

Life Writing | Vol 1, No 2

final reporting can legitimate the testimonies of the victims, turning
witnesses into survivors of abuse. Affirmation of the testimony
allows those who testified to take up agentic social positions in the
present even as they bear witness to their objectification in the past,
although it can also, at least partially, instate their identity status as
victims.
Even so, official reports strategically deploy personal testimony
to achieve political ends. The translocation of personal narration
from live testimony to published report repositions the narrating
voice, making it part of the larger narrative of nation. Moreover,
reports frame personal testimony in specific ways as they address
national or transnational audiences. Victim testimony is often
thematised in different sections of a report, or juxtaposed against
perpetrator testimony, or segmented to document specific human
rights violations. Thus the voice, structure, style, intentions and
ownership of an individual story can be appropriated to and
subordinated by the larger intentions of the reporting commission.
Testimonies can be reduced to forensic evidence, denuded of
emotion and removed from the individual lives and experiences of
suffering and trauma. They can be excerpted and joined to other
excerpts to produce corroborative evidence through deindividualised repetition. They can be placed within ethical and
moral frameworks in order to solicit empathy and understanding.
Such framing can enhance awareness of human rights abuse for
previously unknowing readers, but it can also induce a sense of
shame on behalf of the nation for both witnesses and audiences
whose shadowed and hidden pasts are exposed and opened to
scrutiny.
The legitimation of stories through human rights reports builds
solidarity within disaffected groups and generates a new awareness of
the crimes embedded within the nation’s past, which can lead to
significant social change. But the circulation of stories in reports can
also be contentious and fraught with uncertainty. If victims
experience trauma at the time of retelling their stories, often after
years of protective shielding and active forgetting by the nation, they
may suffer re-traumatisation and continued wounding once their
testimony becomes public. Once in the public domain and secured
14

Schaffer-Smith.qxd

7/09/2004

1:55 PM

Page 15

Kay Schaffer and Sidonie Smith | Venues of Storytelling

within the pages of a human rights commission report, their stories
can be subjected to further scrutiny and response, including
acceptance and recognition but also challenge, rebuttal, scorn and
denial. Victim healing may require apology, responsibility,
recognition and reparations; but the government may or may not
respond to commission recommendations. National political leaders
and resistant national governments, desirous of protecting
themselves from the implications of a UN-sponsored human rights
inquiry, may reject the report’s findings, challenge the authenticity of
the speakers, question their motives or those of the presiding
commissioners, and subject the testimony to legalistic tests of
credibility. Further, the moral and ethical imperatives of restorative
justice, like those of the South African TRC, may set up expectations
of social transformation and hopes for the future that prove
impossible to meet. Or, as in the case of Canada, commission reports
and their recommendations can result in the redistribution of land
and the recognition of Indigenous self-determination for some —
but not all — victims of a colonial history of dispossession. Or, as in
the case of Australia, they can prompt contentious national debates,
denials of redress, and forums of blame and suspicion. Finally, the
conflicts and contestations that attend the publication and circulation
of personal stories within local communities and the nation can
intensify the pain suffered by victims and their communities.
Collections of testimonies
Another way in which personal narratives circulate in the context of
struggles for human rights is through published collections of
testimony. They gain their ethical force by gathering multiple
narratives of shared victimisation into one volume whose purpose is
to challenge and rewrite history, call the reader to recognition and
spur action. Such anthologies are almost always, though not
invariably, introduced and edited by advocates or activists who
provide scholarly commentary on the contexts that gave rise to the
testimony and propose interpretative human rights frameworks
through which to read and make sense of the stories.
15

Schaffer-Smith.qxd

7/09/2004

1:55 PM

Page 16

Life Writing | Vol 1, No 2

The collective presentation of multiple stories of loss and
suffering enforces the horror and impact of the wrongs of the past,
but it has other effects as well. The purposeful repetition of stories
often produces what might be called an ‘ur’ narrative of
victimisation. A common story emerges out of the accumulation of
voices telling stories that conform to a similar structure, thematically
organised to invoke similar histories of abuse, violence or
degradation, and utilising similar modes of address that make an
emotive appeal.These edited versions ‘fix’ the life and identity of the
tellers in their victimhood, often locking the survivors’ stories and
lives to the past. Such collections solicit empathetic identification
between the tellers and their audiences and encourage cognitive
awareness of discriminatory practices, both of which serve to enliven
the scholar/activist/editor’s mandate for human rights activism.
Inger Agger’s The Blue Room: trauma and testimony among refugee
women: a psychosocial exploration (1994) offers an example of the way
in which activist/scholars organise testimony according to their
disciplinary jurisdiction. A Danish psychologist who has worked
extensively with victims of trauma, Agger structures her
psychosocial exploration of trauma around the notion of the ritual
space of rooms.The ‘blue room’ of her title refers to both the bluewalled room in her apartment where the interviews were conducted
and to the ritual, metaphorical space of psychological healing.
Composed of chapters with titles such as ‘The Daughter’s Room’,
‘The Father’s Room’, the structure of the book builds a ‘house’ of
remembering, the remembering necessary for her subjects to ‘work
through’ the trauma in psychoanalytic terms, to make themselves
whole after the survival of trauma. Agger focuses each chapter on a
first-person account of sexual abuse, torture, imprisonment or other
violations of human rights, giving first place in her project to the
particular voices of women from Latin America and the Middle East
living as refugees in Denmark.While giving priority to the voices of
victims, the psychologist nonetheless situates those voices and stories
within a therapeutic model of recovery, thus imposing a Westernbased paradigm on structures of feeling and languages of suffering.
In Australia after publication of the HREOC’s Bringing Them Home
report (Wilson 1997), readers across the country sought out more
16

Schaffer-Smith.qxd

7/09/2004

1:55 PM

Page 17

Kay Schaffer and Sidonie Smith | Venues of Storytelling

stories from survivors of what had been a hidden national history of
child separation. Within six months of the release of Bringing them
Home, Carmel Bird edited the collection The Stolen Children: their
stories, an anthology containing stories and excerpts from seventeen
witnesses to the inquiry, gathered with their cooperation and
collaboration. (Bird collaborated with witnesses and negotiated
royalties for those whose stories were included.) In addition to the
stories, The Stolen Children anthology includes responses and
reactions to the report from thirteen leading political figures,
historians, philosophers and community leaders, lending different
perspectives to the import of the Indigenous victim stories. The
excerpts from anonymous witnesses, from ‘Paul’,‘Karen’,‘William’
and others, tell of traumatic dislocations of culture and identity,
stories that delimit an entire life to the experience of separation that
stands in for and provides an explanatory framework for the
complexities of the larger lives and experiences of the tellers.
Attesting to the impact the inquiry made on the general public, the
anthology helped to inform the larger non-Indigenous population
within Australia of the paralysing effects of separation on Indigenous
communities. Yet it also had the effect of reducing informants to
victims of separation, infantilised as figures of lost childhood. The
Stolen Children’s emotive form of address, making an empathetic
appeal to the non-Indigenous reader to identify with the victims of
forced childhood separation, as would a bereaved mother, provokes
an imagined parental sympathy in the reader (Whitlock 2001,
203ff.). In terms of human rights discourse, Bird’s anthology asks the
reader to understand governmental policies of child separation as
‘nothing but a policy of systematic genocide’ (1998, 1), a claim also
made in the HREOC report that prompted widespread shock among
Australian readers, initially garnering sympathetic support but
subsequently prompting resistance and backlash.
As these examples suggest, anthologies of personal narratives,
organised around targeted human rights abuses or targeted issues in
survival, personalise stories of rights violations and make them
available to a wider audience. Although they provide evidence of a
range of experiences that particularise the effects of rights violations
17

Schaffer-Smith.qxd

7/09/2004

1:55 PM

Page 18

Life Writing | Vol 1, No 2

and government policies and practices on individual lives, they also,
however, format the different stories in standardised structures and
thematics of presentation. Juxtaposing multiple narratives, they cast
a patina of anonymity (even if names are included) and uniformity
upon the witnesses. Framed by scholar/activists, they impose
frameworks from the cultural location of the editor onto narratives
coming from distinctively different cultural locales. While the
personal narratives encourage empathetic identification, that
identification comes at the cost of potentially reducing differences to
sameness.
Stories and the media
Even before people had access to the internet they were utilising
media technologies to tell their local stories, spurring activism and
intervention. For example, in China during the hunger strikes on
Tiananmen Square, students maintained contact with supporters in
Hong Kong via fax machines.The Hong Kong contact proved vital to
support for ongoing protests both inside and outside mainland
China.5 In South Africa, one of the most successful independent
media projects was the establishment of independent community
radio networks in the townships prior to the release of Nelson
Mandela.6 Through these underground networks local communities
could track anti-apartheid activism across South Africa and elude the
reach of state-sponsored censorship. In South Africa, China and
elsewhere, underground newspapers have been a major source of
opposition to government oppression throughout the last fifty years
of the rights regime.
If the pace of human rights awareness and activism dramatically
quickened in the 1990s, this is undoubtedly due to the influence of
the internet, which extended the reach of independent media across
the globe. In 1994, the Indigenous Mexican groups known as the
Zapatistas were the first to utilise the internet to publicise their
campaign for Indigenous rights in Chiapas. Referring to the
importance of a global media, Subcommandante Marcos, the
movement’s leading spokesperson, declared: ‘We did not go to war
on January 1 to kill or have them kill us.We went to make ourselves
18

Schaffer-Smith.qxd

7/09/2004

1:55 PM

Page 19

Kay Schaffer and Sidonie Smith | Venues of Storytelling

heard’ (quoted in Knudson 1998, 508).The Zapatistas, whose claims
for land went virtually unheard for five centuries, achieved a victory
in this instance. Blending local voices, utilising the vernacular and
linking Indigenous stories to the internet, the Zapatistas tackled the
consequences of modernisation for people’s survival through
postmodern technological strategies, initiating a new kind of politics
that trespassed the borders of the nation-state.7 Telling their stories
to the world through the capacities of the internet, local Mestizo and
Indigenous communities in Mexico were brought in touch with one
another. Their voices, heard outside the state, brought the plight of
ten million Indigenous people living in abject conditions to
international attention, opening up new public spaces for Indigenous
peoples and fundamentally transforming rights discourse and politics
along the way. Since that time, Indigenous peoples in other locations
have adopted similar strategies, utilising international communication
technologies to ‘build sites of counter-hegemonic power which give
unprecedented exposure to their politics of naming and shaming to
reclaim their traditions and lands through the assertion of
rights’ (Havemann 2000, 21). In this local campaign, the voices of
activism carried across virtual communities of affiliation to national
and transnational settings.
Countless other sites continue to bring the voices of human rights
victims to an ever-increasing community of international listeners.
Those like www.universalrights.net, created to promote the fiftieth
anniversary of the signing of the UDHR, feature people telling their
stories.There are stories about democracy and freedom, equality and
justice, peace and well-being; stories from Indigenous people,
women and children; stories from victims of poverty, torture,
environmental catastrophe; stories about successful human rights
campaigns and human rights heroes like Martin Luther King Jr,
Rigoberta Menchú, Nelson Mandela, Patrick Dodson and Aung San
Suu Kyi.Visitors to this site are invited to tell their own stories about
victims and heroes, and are instructed on how to report human
rights violations, get involved in campaigns and find links to other
sites. Websites like Witness, mentioned previously in the context of
producing narrative accounts to promote advocacy, enable local
19

Schaffer-Smith.qxd

7/09/2004

1:55 PM

Page 20

Life Writing | Vol 1, No 2

groups that have no access to the national domain to tell their stories
and document their experiences with the use of a camcorder.8 In the
words of one recent storyteller, ‘this camera means that someone in
this world cares about us, about our struggle, seeing this camera here
today means that we are not alone’ (Datu Makapukauw, quoted on
Witness website newsletter, Fall 2000 – September 2001).
State-based media may also bring about change beneficial to
rights victims from within the nation.Although rights advocates have
been reluctant to acknowledge the efficacy of government webbased initiatives (often the only ones available in authoritarian states
like China), the extension of e-government and e-commerce sites
has the capacity to foster social change even in more-or-less
authoritarian regimes. In other words, it is not only cyber-dissidents
whose net-based initiatives pressure regimes for change. An
increasing number of states, from Singapore to Vietnam, from China
to Egypt, have launched sophisticated ‘e-government’ initiatives that
effectively increase people’s access to information about social
services, link state bureaucracies with even the most remote citizens,
and offer the potential for political liberalisation and an increase in
‘government transparency’ and ‘accountability’ (Kalathil 2002, 4 of
6).The downside to these initiatives, in terms of political efficacy, is
that they also enable governments to increase levels of surveillance,
censorship, and propaganda.
Internet media, then, are not without their limitations. Not
everyone can gain access to internet technologies, as the case in
Myanmar vividly illustrates. There, according to Shanthi Kalathil, ‘a
1996 decree makes possession of even an unregistered telephone
(much less a computer) illegal and punishable by
imprisonment’ (2002, 3 of 6). Even with access, the distinctive and
incommensurable aspects of culture for which campaigns seek
recognition can be diluted, possibly even effaced. In the transnational
flows of rights activism, the distinctive nature of the local may be
too-fully absorbed by the global.Web-based activism connects rights
campaigns to the market forces of global capital, facilitating the
commodification of stories and media, sometimes in an uneasy
collusion.
20

Schaffer-Smith.qxd

7/09/2004

1:55 PM

Page 21

Kay Schaffer and Sidonie Smith | Venues of Storytelling

Scattered venues
Finally, the regime of human rights unfolds in scattered venues and
scattered media. People tell their stories in films and documentaries,
in museum displays, on television and radio talk shows, at union
meetings and political rallies, at rock concerts, at book fairs, literary
festivals and speaking tours, in alternative newspapers, on T-shirts,
lapels and bumper stickers. Alongside official human rights
apparatuses, and operating simultaneously with them, these
scattered events make visible various dimensions of human rights
campaigns in local contexts.These eruptions of human rights claims
in venues distant from official networks of advocacy foster
meshworks (Harcourt 2002) of awareness and lift claims to new
levels of national and international visibility.
Cultural institutions have also become locations of political
activism on behalf of rights violations and injustices. Theater
companies stage performances that disseminate information and
catalyse moral indignation about particular situations, as did Tony
Kushner’s Angels in America (1993) in the United States and Jane
Harrison’s Stolen (1998) in Australia. Museums promote mutual
recognition of diverse social and cultural groups through new
approaches to public space and public display. Presenting a
polyphony of divergent voices rather than univocal interpretations of
the nation’s cultural history, they disrupt dominant structures of
power. Museums can also become venues for exhibitions and
installations about human rights violations by artists and
photojournalists such as the Australian artist/activist George
Gittoes, the American videographer Carol Jacobsen and the Japanese
artist Taeko Tomiyama. Alternative video and photographic exhibits
document the lives of people living in circumstances in which
violations of human rights occur on a daily basis, as did the exhibits
about life in El Salvador and Palestine mounted by the
photojournalist Larry Towell and life in the ‘killing fields’ mounted
by Cambodian photojournalist Dith Pran.
Public displays outside institutional contexts become
spontaneous and popular sites for recognising, remembering and
mourning victims and survivors of human rights abuses.The multiple
21

Schaffer-Smith.qxd

7/09/2004

1:55 PM

Page 22

Life Writing | Vol 1, No 2

appearances of AIDS quilts around the globe in the 1990s, for
instance, called attention to the AIDS pandemic as a human rights
concern. As the size of the quilt grew, and as it was replicated in
many nations, so did the extent of the population aware of the
devastations of a disease that had been stigmatised and of people
marginalised and abandoned. After the Bringing Them Home report
was published in Australia, hundreds of thousands of citizens signed
Sorry Books as a gesture of sympathy and personal apology. Sea of
Hands, a ground display of multicolored plastic hand shapes that
appeared first as a part of the 1997 Reconciliation Week activities,
alerted the nation and the world not only to Indigenous human rights
claims but also to their widespread support throughout the nation.
Currently, over 250,000 people have registered their commitment
to and support of native title claims for Indigenous Australians
through the Sea of Hands.
Even more dispersed in their effects are the signs individuals wear
as they go about their everyday lives. Through tee-shirts, ribbons,
arm bands, tattoos, decals, bumper stickers and the like, people
announce their identification with particular persons — Mumia
Abu-Jamal, Nelson Mandela or the Mothers of the Disappeared —
or with particular causes and campaigns — various Indigenous, antiwar or ‘solidarity’ movements. In 1998, a group of Italian observers
surprised locals when they traveled to Chiapas, Mexico, to protest
against human rights violations. Wearing T-shirts that read ‘Todos
somos Indios del mundo’ (‘We are all Indians of the World’), they
expressed solidarity with the Indigenous Chiapas Indians in their
battle with the Mexican government (Jornada.unam website). Here
people’s bodies display their identification with other persons and
causes, often remote from their own local and national contexts,
effectively serving as a kind of body billboard to call attention to, and
support for, other people’s stories.
Spontaneous and unexpected events become especially important
when circumstances on the ground may not yet be framed or
recognised as legitimate in human rights terms, or when issues have
not achieved international recognition as human rights violations, or
when member states refuse to acknowledge violations on a local
level. Because they take place in the realm of popular culture and
22

Schaffer-Smith.qxd

7/09/2004

1:55 PM

Page 23

Kay Schaffer and Sidonie Smith | Venues of Storytelling

affect people’s everyday life experiences, these events and actions
can draw attention to the specific situations and create a larger
audience knowledgeable about, and invested in, human rights issues.
As a result, issues become attached to human rights discourse, an
attachment that creates an atmosphere of instability out of which
new initiatives for social change can form.
Scattered sites move human rights claims into an international
sociality of language, commitment and action for justice. But, as with
all the sites we have surveyed, the scattered sites of storytelling and
rights activism have a qualified efficacy. Channeled through the
interests of global capital, some sites augment the coffers of
advertisers; some make witnesses into spectacles of suffering; some
address their audiences through emotive confrontation, setting in
motion affective appeals that have a ‘feel-good’ effect for their farflung advocates, but may not further recognition, ethical judgment
or redress.
Conclusion
All sites surveyed above signify far more than their geographical or
institutional locations. As affective sites, they disperse embodied
forces of intensity into political, legal, aesthetic, ethical and moral
discourses and actions.As ideological sites, they test the notion of the
universal, generating multiple contestations and contradictions. As
dialogical sites, they join tellers and listeners/readers in
communicative exchanges about the meaning of rights. As cultural
sites, they unsettle familiar knowledge frameworks by introducing
different interpretations across the boundaries of cultural difference.
As nodal sites, they engage local and global transits, opening new
possibilities for becoming. Taken together, fact-finding in the field,
handbooks and websites, commission hearings and reports,
published narratives and anthologies of witness testimony, stories in
the media and scattered events offer multiple and proliferating
occasions, forms and usages for storytelling in the field of human
rights.
The production, circulation and reception of stories within any
particular campaign unfold unevenly across these sites. Some forms
23

Schaffer-Smith.qxd

7/09/2004

1:55 PM

Page 24

Life Writing | Vol 1, No 2

are more prominent in specific campaigns than others. Some
produce rights claims that contradict claims from other sites. Some
enable new stories to be told by people previously silenced in public
forums. Some organise and some disrupt terms on which rights can
be taken up. Some forestall and some advance human freedoms.
Some intend to make objective, juridical claims on specific listeners,
while others evoke emotive responses that prompt popular
awareness and activism. Each site, with its own mix of formal,
contextual, social, historical and cultural particularities, contributes
to an international human rights agenda in ways that contest,
constrain and advance the principles embodied in the UDHR.

Notes

1
2

3

4

5

24

Copyright © Kay Schaffer and Sidonie Smith. Adapted from Human Rights and
Narrated Lives by Kay Schaffer and Sidonie Smith. Reprinted with permission
of Palgrave Macmillan.
For the emotional and ethical difficulties of this positioning, see Krishna Sen
2000, 110 and Beryl Langer 2000, 195.
In the midst of this fieldwork, fact-finders’ and witness’s lives may be put at
risk.Witnesses in particular face the possibility of reprisal if they give personal
testimony or, in the case of Indigenous people, if they reveal sacred secret
knowledge. Anonymity, however, limits the truth-value of the testimony, often
rendering it suspect.
In 2002, Witness documentary testimony was offered into evidence at the
World Court during the International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), in which two former army officers were found guilty of
crimes against women.
We borrow these terms from Wendy Harcourt. Networks refer to
independent, organised, hierarchical and geographically dispersed
organisations and institutions that investigate, promote, monitor and
adjudicate rights claims. Meshworks denote the non-hierarchal, unstructured,
dense flows of connections among groups and peoples working on behalf of
human rights that transcend national boundaries.
Media links with Hong Kong also resulted in massive street demonstrations in
which one million of the city’s 5.5 million residents marched in solidarity with
the students. A Hong Kong rock concert for protestors raised valuable cash to
maintain the protest.

Schaffer-Smith.qxd

7/09/2004

1:55 PM

Page 25

Kay Schaffer and Sidonie Smith | Venues of Storytelling

6 To avoid surveillance, radios were set up under surgical beds in a gynecological
clinics. When police raids occurred, officers would be put off in their
investigations by the sight of undressed women lying on the beds in stirrups.
7 Bethany Turner explains that in contrast to the Marxist–Leninist diatribes of
the past, the Zapatistas ‘employed a simplistic vernacular used to convey
information in an often lyrical, story-like manner, rich with poetic imagery’
(Turner 2001, 5). Subcommandante Marcos adopted a language familiar to the
Tzeltales,Tzotziles and Choles so that freedom fights and people in Indigenous
communities found common ground for resistance.
8 One disadvantage of the advanced technological features of Witness is that full
access also requires sophisticated hardware. Other sites, like
Universalrights.net offer access to stories and invite viewer dialogue in ways
that require minimal hardware.

Bibliography
Agger, Inger. The Blue Room: trauma and testimony among refugee women: a psychosocial exploration. London: Zed Books, 1994.
Amnesty International. Amnesty International Handbook. 7th ed. New York:
Amnesty International Publications, 1991.
Attwood, Bain and Fiona Magowan, eds. Telling Stories: Indigenous history and
memory in Australia and New Zealand. Sydney: Allen & Unwin, 2001.
Bird, Carmel, ed. The Stolen Children: their stories. Sydney: Random House, 1998.
Brown, A Widney and Laura Grenfell. ‘The International Crime of Gender-Based
Persecution and the Taliban’ in Melbourne Journal of International Law 4.2
(2003): 347–75.
Charlesworth, Hilary and Hilary Chinkin. The Boundaries of International Law: a
feminist analysis. Executive Park, NY: Juris Publications, 2000.
Gilmore, Leigh. The Limits of Autobiography: trauma and testimony. Ithaca: Cornell
University Press, 2001.
Harcourt, Wendy. Women Refiguring Globalisation: gender and the politics of place.
Adelaide: Unpublished paper, 2002.
Harrison, Jane. Stolen. Sydney: Currency Press, 1998.
Havemann, Paul. ‘Enmeshed in the Web? Indigenous Peoples’ Rights in the
Network Society’ in Global Social Movements. Eds Robin Cohen and Shirin M
Rai. London and New Brunswick:The Athlone Press, 2000: 18–32.
Hesford,Wendy S and Wendy Kozol, eds. Haunting Violations: feminist criticism and
the crisis of the ‘real’. Urbana and Chicago: University of Illinois Press, 2001.
Kalathil, Shanthi. ‘Dot Com for Dictators’. Foreign Policy: the magazine of global
politics, economics, and ideas. 2002.
Knudson, Jerry. ‘Rebellion in Chiapas: Insurrection by Internet and Public
Relations’ in Media, Culture and Society 20.3 (1998): 507–18.
25

Schaffer-Smith.qxd

7/09/2004

1:55 PM

Page 26

Life Writing | Vol 1, No 2

Kushner, Tony. Angels in America: a gay fantasia on national themes. New York,
Theatre Communications Group, 1993.
La Jornada, Online general director, Carmel Lira Saade. Accessed March 2003.
<http://www.jornada.unam.mx>
Langer, Beryl. ‘Mothers of the Disappeared in the Diaspora: globalization and
human rights’ in Human Rights and Gender Politics: Asia-Pacific perspectives. Eds
Anne-Marie Hilsdon, Martha Macintyre, Vera Mackie and Maila Stivens.
London and New York: Routledge, 2000: 193–210.
Menchú, Rigoberta with Elisabeth Burgos-Debray. I, Rigoberta Menchú: an Indian
woman in Guatemala. London:Verso, 1984.
Novick, Peter. The Holocaust in American Life. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1999.
Povinelli, Elizabeth A. The Cunning of Recognition: Indigenous alterities and the
making of Australian multiculturalism. Durham: Duke University Press, 2002.
Ravindran, D J, Manuel Guzman, et al. Handbook on Fact-Finding and
Documentation of Human Rights Violations. Bangkok: Asian Forum for Human
Rights Deveolpment (FORUM-ASIA), 1994.
Schaffer, Kay and Sidonie Smith. Human Rights and Narrated Lives: the ethics of
recognition. New York and London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2004.
Sen, Krishna. ‘The Human Rights of Gendered Citizens: Notes from Indonesia’ in
Human Rights and Gender Politics: Asia-Pacific perspectives. Eds Anne-Marie
Hilsdon, Martha Macintyre,Vera Mackie and Maila Stivens. London and New
York: Routledge, 2000: 107–21.
Thoolen, Hans and Berth Verstappen. Human Rights Missions: a study of the factfinding practice of non-governmental organizations. Dordrecht and Boston:
M Nijhoff, 1986.
Turner, Bethany. ‘Writing Resistance: lessons from Mexico’s far southeast’ in
Resistance and Reconciliation: writing the Commonwealth. Canberra: ACLALS,
2001: 1–10.
Universal Rights Network, produced by Kim Gleeson. Accessed November 2003.
<http://www.universalrights.net>
Whitlock, Gillian. ‘In the Second Person: narrative transactions in stolen
generations testimony’ in biography 24.1 (2001): 197–214.
Wilson, Sir Ronald. Bringing them Home: national inquiry into the separation of
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander children from their families. Canberra:
Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission, 1997.
WITNESS: Using Video and Technology to Fight for Human Rights. Peter Gabriel,
Lawyers Committee for Human Rights and Reebok Human Rights
Foundation. Accessed November 2002. <http://www.witness.org>
Yamamoto, Eric K. ‘Racial Reparations: Japanese American redress and African
American claims’ in Boston College Law Review 40.1 (1998): 477–523.

26

