History and Theory 50 (May 2011), 203-209

© Wesleyan University 2011 ISSN: 0018-2656

Forum: Holberg Prize Symposium
Doing Decentered History
2.
STORYTELLING
Joan W. Scott
abstract

Natalie Davis is a quintessential storyteller in the way theorized by Walter Benjamin,
Hannah Arendt, and Michel de Certeau. Her work decenters history not simply because
it grants agency and so historical visibility to those who have been hidden from history or
left on its margins, but also because her stories reveal the complexities of human experience and so challenge the received categories with which we are accustomed to thinking
about the world.
Keywords: storytelling, narrative, history, Benjamin, Arendt, Certeau, Geertz
“Le passé est une histoire que l’on conte.”
—Natalie Zemon Davis

It is a commonplace that historians are storytellers. So much so that the Graduate Record Exam (the test taken by candidates for various university graduate
programs in the United States) uses as one of its “issue questions” the following:
“When we concern ourselves with the study of history, we become storytellers.
Because we can never know the past directly but must construct it by interpreting
evidence, exploring history is more of a creative enterprise than it is an objective
pursuit. All historians are storytellers.”
The question sets up a familiar opposition: between facts and interpretation,
objective science and artistic creativity, reality and fiction. The best answers will
try to negotiate some balance between these contradictory categories, arguing,
for example, that interpretation is necessarily reined in by evidence, or that creativity is also an attribute of science. Storytelling itself will get short shrift in the
responses—at least that is what I conclude from reading the sample good answer
provided on the GRE website. And yet storytelling is central to the writing of
history, not the least because narrative is a way of making human experience

. Natalie Zemon Davis, “Les conteurs de Montaillou,” Annales: Économies, Sociétés, Civilisations
34, no. 1 (1979), 70.
. Graduate record examination, sample question. http://www.eduers.com/gre/sampleissues07.htm
(accessed May 13, 2010).

204

joan w. scott

meaningful. The “ability to produce stories,” Hannah Arendt wrote, is the way we
“become historical.”
Our personal, individual stories, however, require something more to become
history than our own telling of them. Arendt argued that “human essence . . . the
essence of who somebody is—can come into being only when life departs, leaving behind nothing but a story. . . . Even Achilles . . . remains dependent upon the
storyteller, poet, or historian, without whom everything he did remains futile.”
It’s this after-the-factness that historians are charged with providing; the stories
they tell can make the difference between immortality and oblivion.
Yet not all histories are the same. True, most adhere to some form of narrative
presentation—chronology provides a ready format. And they are based on information gathered from at least some narrative sources: memoirs, diaries, letters,
and the like. But this information is typically used in the service of historians’ stories, the ones they have constructed on the basis of the evidence at hand. Whether
the goal of such history is the transmission of information or the consolidation of
collective identities (as members of nations or tribes or social movements—based
on class, religion, race, ethnicity, gender, or sexuality), whether it is more or less
aimed at securing an emotional effect, it tends to undervalue the richness of the
stories from which it is drawn. Unless the object of inquiry is biography (and not
always even then), the original archival stories are left aside, so many hulls from
which all the meaty substance has been extracted.
For Walter Benjamin, the transmission of information has nothing to do with
the art of storytelling, even if its presentation takes narrative form. “The storyteller takes what he tells from experience—his own or that reported by others.
And he in turn makes it the experience of those who are listening to his tale.” The
best storytellers interpret, but they don’t offer easy explanations for what they recount. The interpretation is not didactic, but more like what a pianist does when he
“interprets” a musical composition. Through the subtlety of their presentation and
the deftness of their interpretation, storytellers open their readers’ imaginations; in
this way the “story’s richness and germinative power endures.”
In Benjamin’s conception, the historian-storyteller is part of a chain of storytellers, an intermediary, perhaps a midwife, who understands that she is bringing forth something that did not originate with her. “Storytelling,” he writes, “is
always the art of repeating stories.” Reading Arendt in this light elaborates the
point. Action and speech are what make us human, she notes, “and the least tangible and most ephemeral of man-made ‘products’” are “the deeds and stories
which are their outcome.” It is those stories that give us insight not just into
the particularities of historical experience, but also into the very meaning of the
human. For the historian to ignore the stories themselves—their form and content—is to deny agency to historical subjects, to overlook the choices they made
. Hannah Arendt, The Human Condition (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1958), 97.
. Ibid., 59.
. Walter Benjamin, “The Storyteller: Reflections on the Works of Nikolai Leskov,” in Benjamin,
Illuminations: Essays and Reflections, transl. Harry Zohn (New York: Schocken Books, 1968), 87.
. Ibid., 90.
. Ibid., 5.
. Arendt, The Human Condition, 197-198.

storytelling

205

and the ways they found to explain their actions to themselves and others. It is
to refuse to engage with the novelty of the old, the strangeness of the new, or the
irreducible difference of the other—to insist instead on sameness, on the comfortable familiarity of the already known.
Precisely because they take us somewhere else, “every story is a travel story,”
says Michel de Certeau. Stories organize space and mark out boundaries and, at
the same time, enable us to transcend them. Certeau uses the figures of the bridge
and the frontier to talk about the story’s “logic of ambiguity.”
As a transgression of the limit, a disobedience of the law of the place, [the bridge] represents a departure, an attack on a state, on the ambition of a conquering power, or the flight
of an exile; in any case the “betrayal” of an order. But at the same time as it offers the
possibility of a bewildering exteriority, it allows or causes the re-emergence beyond the
frontiers of the alien element that was controlled in the interior, and gives objectivity (that
is expression and re-presentation) to the alterity which was hidden inside the limits, so that
in recrossing the bridge and coming back within the enclosure the traveler henceforth finds
there the exteriority that he had first sought by going outside and then fled by returning.
Within the frontiers, the alien is already there, an exoticism or sabbath of the memory, a
disquieting familiarity. It is as though delimitation itself were the bridge that opens the
inside to its others.10

Certeau is here making a point about the formal properties of stories, which we
can also use to think about storytellers. The stories they choose to retell become
a way not only of exposing us to differences beyond our frontiers, but also open
us to other ways of thinking about the present, the place we live now. In this
way, storytelling has a decentering effect; it offers epistemological challenges to
whatever are the orthodox categories of current historiography: surprising them,
throwing them off their guard.
Storytelling is a quintessentially social activity. It requires not only readers or
listeners, but other storytellers. Stories are at once the raw material and the cultural product of memory. Their telling creates a sense of immediacy (even when
they are about very old events and actions) and what Kant (in a different context)
referred to as “the universal feeling of taking part.”11 At the same time, what they
impart is highly particular: descriptions of individual actions, emotions, and outcomes that may be idiosyncratic or unique. (Indeed, it is precisely this uniqueness
that often makes for a most compelling story.) Samuel Weber suggests that the
always ambivalent combination of the universal (“taking part”) and the particular is what makes the humanities human; it is another way of thinking Certeau’s
alien within the frontiers.12 Arendt rests “human plurality” on “the fact of natality,
through which the human world is constantly invaded by strangers, newcomers
whose actions and reactions cannot be foreseen by those who are already there
and are going to leave in a short while.”13 Weber reminds us that psychoanalysis
. Michel de Certeau, The Practice of Everyday Life, transl. Steven F. Rendall (Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1984), 115.
10. Ibid., 128-129.
11. Samuel Weber, Institutions and Interpretation (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press,
1987), 143.
12. Ibid., 144.
13. Arendt, “The Concept of History: Ancient and Modern,” cited in Julia Kristeva, Hannah
Arendt: Life is a Narrative, transl. Frank Collins (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2001), 25.

206

joan w. scott

posits the human subject as psychically divided, depending for its sense of self
on the recognition of others. To be human is to be endlessly entwined in complex
relationships of difference that don’t settle comfortably into neat, prefabricated
categories. From this perspective, stories are the mark of the human, and the historian-storyteller is the muse of the humanities.
Natalie Zemon Davis is such a muse. To read her work and to think about it with
her is at once to theorize storytelling as a historical practice and to recognize
the distinctiveness of her craftsmanship. There is no mistaking her imprint on
the compilations of stories that make up her books. A comment of Benjamin’s is
aptly applied to Davis: “The traces of the storyteller cling to the story the way the
handprints of the potter cling to the clay vessel.”14 In Davis’s work the imprint
is ethical and that in two senses: it respects the integrity of stories from the past
while at the same time making them relevant for our thinking in the present. But
it is also about pleasure: the sheer delight that comes from gathering and relaying
stories is a distinctive mark of Davis the storyteller.
Davis’s historical materials are the stories told by people in the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries. They give her, she says, access to real lives, to the hopes
and feelings of those once referred to as “the common man” or, more unfortunately, “the inarticulate.” That last phrase came in the late 1960s and early 70s, as
social historians argued that demographic and other quantitative sources were the
best way to reconstitute the lives of those who left no written records of the kind
historians customarily employed. In order to learn something about the experience of those who had become invisible in the annals of history, one had to impute
meaning to the statistical categories by which state administrators had measured
their lives. (I think here of Edward Shorter’s contention that the high rate of illegitimate births among girls new to the industrial labor force was a sure sign of
their sexual emancipation.15)
Davis chose another path, ingeniously turning up sources that gave voice to le
menu peuple. She wasn’t alone in this, of course, but she was distinctive in her insistence on letting their stories constitute the substance of her history. “I let all my
characters have their say,” she wrote in response to a critic who had accused her
of, among other things, misreading her sources in The Return of Martin Guerre.
“I try to construct their stance toward the world so that they are understandable
in terms of the range of values of their day.”16 The emphasis on voices recurs in
book after book. “Here are some voices of the sixteenth century” is the opening
line of “Printing and the People,” one of the essays in Society and Culture in Early
Modern France.17 The introduction to Martin Guerre tells readers that what will
follow is “part my invention, but held tightly in check by the voices of the past.”18
14. Benjamin, “The Storyteller,” 92.
15. Edward Shorter, “Female Emancipation, Birth Control, and Fertility in European History,”
American Historical Review 78, no. 3 (1973), 605-640.
16. Natalie Zemon Davis, “On the Lame,” American Historical Review 93, no. 3 (1988), 598.
17. Natalie Zemon Davis, Society and Culture in Early Modern France (Stanford: Stanford
University Press, 1975), 189.
18. Natalie Zemon Davis, The Return of Martin Guerre (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 1983), 5.

storytelling

207

After a discussion of method in Society and Culture, Davis turned the matter over
to her subjects: “But let the reader hear what the Lord of Misrule and Ghostly
Sally have to say about that.”19 Fiction in the Archives takes letters of remission,
written or dictated by sixteenth-century French people accused of heinous crimes,
as a form of voice, however constrained by juridical formalities. Women on the
Margins begins with a conversation in which her three protagonists (one Jew, one
Catholic, and one Protestant) give voice to their objections to each other and to
the author’s texts. Davis tries, without success, to explain her frame of reference
to these women who will have none of it. The imagined exchange points up the
difficulty that storytellers have in being heard outside the contexts of their cultures
and times, but also the possibility of making differences—among contemporaries
as well as between past and present—apparent, even playful, and so a source of
understanding rather than violence.20
Citation of these voices is not Davis’s way of decorating her text with lively
anecdotes and a few entertainments. Rather, she considers voice to be the way
people construct agency. Stories are, for Davis, a form of action in Arendt’s sense:
“In word and deed we insert ourselves into the human world.”21 The “storytelling features” of documents yield insight for Davis into the way people think, the
kinds of intellectual and cultural resources they mobilize, the interplay among
social determination, strategic adaptation, and individual invention.22 This doesn’t
mean taking words at face value, but examining them in the (social, economic,
political, religious, institutional) contexts they are offered, as engagements with
circumstances, attempts to exert some control over difficult or, for that matter,
ordinary occurrences. The historian, of course, interprets and intuits; but if she
supplements her knowledge of contexts with a trained ear, she can turn up some
startling news.
It is this news, I want to argue, that decenters history and not simply because
it grants agency and so historical visibility to those who have heretofore been
“hidden from history” or left on its margins. The stories, sometimes even those recounted by the powerful, reveal complexities of human experience that challenge
the categories with which we are accustomed to thinking about the world. There
are all sorts of ways in which Davis’s histories reveal this to be the case: particular
exchanges—between judges and peasants; Protestants, Catholics, Jews and Muslims; the learned and the illiterate—reveal a remarkable fluidity. Referring to the
complexities of pardon letters, Davis notes, “We have here not an impermeable
‘official culture’ imposing its criteria on ‘popular culture,’ but cultural exchange,
conducted under the king’s rule.”23 The best metaphor for this is Certeau’s notion
that “every story is a travel story.” Davis’s storytellers are voyagers whether they
migrate or stay at home; they take us to places we haven’t considered, remind us
of the strangeness that refuses to be systematized (or centered) by the order we
19. Davis, Society and Culture, xviii.
20. Natalie Zemon Davis, Women on the Margins: Three Seventeenth-Century Lives (Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press, 1995), 1-4.
21. Arendt, “The Concept of History,” 25.
22. Natalie Zemon Davis, Fiction in the Archives: Pardon Tales and Their Tellers in SixteenthCentury France (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1987), viii.
23. Ibid., 112

208

joan w. scott

want to impose on things. In their particularity they resist the simplicity of universal assumptions based on sameness; instead they remind us that difference is the
very ground of our common humanity.
It is, perhaps, the literal travel story of Leo Africanus, also known as al-Hasan
al-Wazzan, that best illustrates the way Davis’s stories confound our sense of
order and, in so doing, bring to historical study a deeply felt ethical concern. She
begins the story of this remarkable man, who recounted his experiences in several
manuscripts as he moved from Africa to Europe, from Islam to Christianity, living
among “Berbers, Andalusians, Arabs, Jews and Blacks,” traversing the Mediterranean world in the sixteenth century, this way:
Through his example, I could explore how a man moved between different polities, made
use of different cultural and social resources, and entangled or separated them so as to
survive, discover, write, make relationships, and think about society and himself. I could
try to see whether these processes were easy or a struggle, whether they brought delight or
disappointment. Like some others I have written about, al-Hasan al-Wazzan is an extreme
case . . . but an extreme case can often reveal patterns available for more everyday experience and writing.24

Those patterns, she maintains, are ones in which people intermingled, in which
difference was no barrier to contact, and in which people made choices that defied
the determining boundaries of the structures and institutions we think contained
them. “Al-Wazzan’s book,” she concludes, “was used for many purposes, but for
the myriad educated readers it reached over the centuries, it bore witness to the
possibility of communication and curiosity in a world divided by violence.”25
In his review of Trickster Travels, Clifford Geertz makes the connection to the
present explicit:
The combination in Davis’s book of an intensified consciousness of religio-cultural difference and increased migration, increased contact, and more and more intimate interaction—distinction and mixing, purity and hybridity, resistance and adaptation—does indeed
remind us of the present. Birds among fishes and fishes among birds now seem almost the
rule. Leo’s world and ours are hardly the same; nor are the shapes of change and the forms
of politics the same. But the intermixture of civilizations in the lives of displaced and
peripatetic individuals, born into one tradition and carrying it forward in the homeland of
another, intensifies by the day. Movement between ways of being in the world defines our
times as much as do contrast and tension between them. The confusion of forms of life is,
increasingly, the common state of things.26

However sharp the ideological lines of difference, Geertz notes, they were “continuously traversed by merchants, embassies, pirate ships, travelers, scholars, and
refugees coursing back and forth across the Mediterranean sea-street, then as now
as much a connecting force as a dividing one.” So much for a clash of civilizations, then or now.
There is one more aspect of Davis’s storytelling to note, and that is the obvious
pleasure—indeed the passion—she takes in her craft. Her pleasure in retelling
24. Natalie Zemon Davis, Trickster Travels: A Sixteenth-Century Muslim between Worlds (New
York: Hill and Wang, 2007), 11.
25. Ibid., 260.
26. Clifford Geertz, “Among the Infidels,” New York Review of Books 53, no. 5 (2006). http://
www.nybooks.com/articles/archives/2006/mar/23/among-the-infidels/ (accessed March 18, 2011).

storytelling

209

those stories deepens our own in hearing them, and makes it more likely we will
remember what we have heard. For that reason they are transformative; decentering becomes not an exceptional experience, but the delighted mode of our seeing
and remembering. This is what Benjamin calls “the gift of storytelling”—a gift
that keeps on giving. I was reminded of this a few days ago by an email from a
former student, one of the first PhDs I supervised in the early 1970s. I had written
telling him why I was coming to Bergen. “I well remember,” he wrote, now some
forty years later, “the excitement you communicated to me in the department office . . . about this great paper you had heard at a conference—something about
‘Women on Top.’”27
Davis’s stories teach us to read both past and present in terms not of sameness
or irreconcilable difference, but as instances both of the difficulty and the possibility of human communication. They decenter us not only by introducing us to
people we might otherwise not have met (those on the other side of the bridge of
time or culture or class or race or gender), but also to the differences within and
among ourselves. In that way, Benjamin tells us, “the storyteller joins the ranks of
the teachers and sages. He has counsel—not for a few situations, as the proverb
does, but for the many, like the sage . . . the storyteller is the figure in which the
righteous man [here we should say woman] encounters [herself].”28 There is no
better illustration of this point than Davis’s comment in an article called “Stories
and the Hunger to Know.” On the question of the decentering effects of storytelling, I give her the last word:
History is simultaneously a form of literature; a mode of inquiry and proof, about whose
fruits we have an obligation to fellow historians, to dead subjects of the past, and to readers
of the future; and an arena for struggles of power and collaboration. Of especial importance to me is the historian’s compact with the past . . . and the historian’s promise to the
future. It is a compact sealed in the blood of birth and death, and our stories must respect
that stain.29

Institute for Advanced Study
Princeton, NJ

27. Personal email correspondence, May, 2010.
28. Benjamin, “The Storyteller,” 14.
29. Natalie Zemon Davis, “Narrative as Knowing,” Yale Journal of Criticism 5, no. 2 (1992),
163.

Copyright of History & Theory is the property of Wiley-Blackwell and its content may not be copied or emailed
to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission. However,
users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.

