Kissing Cousins:
Journalism and Oral History
by Mark Feldstein
Abstract This article explores the similarities and differences
between journalism and oral history. Where does one end and
the other begin? What might each learn from the other? The
author compares both print and broadcast journalism to oral
history, examining issues of evidence, purpose, technique, empathy, and ethics. He writes that oral historians and journalists
are like “kissing cousins,” related but separate, whose very
similarities showcase their differences—and the ways each can
improve their own discipline by borrowing techniques from
the other. Specifically, the author argues that journalism would
do well to emulate oral history’s exhaustive and nuanced approach to research evidence, especially its preservation of
interview transcripts that allow public inspection and verification. Conversely, the oral historian should sometimes emulate
the journalist’s more seasoned approach to interviewing—
increasing the quantity of interviews and expanding the range
of approaches, including use of adversarial encounters.

The slave narratives poured out with illiterate eloquence.
One by one, more than a dozen African-American men told an
interviewer what life had been like when they were field-hand

Mark Feldstein (B.A. Harvard, Ph.D. University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill)
is associate professor of media and public affairs and director of the journalism oral
history project at George Washington University in Washington, D.C. Before academia, he conducted literally thousands of interviews during a twenty-year career
as an on-air correspondent at CNN, ABC News, and local television stations. His
work has won nearly fifty journalism prizes, including two George Foster Peabody
public service awards, the Columbia-DuPont baton for investigative reporting, the
Edward R. Murrow broadcasting award, the Sigma Delta Chi bronze medal, and
nine regional Emmys. He has also worked as a freelance writer for Time, The
Nation, The Washington Monthly, and other magazines and newspapers.
The Oral History Review, Vol. 31, No. 1, pages 1–22. ISSN: 0094-1223; electronic ISSN: 1533-8592
© 2004 by the Oral History Association. All rights reserved.
Send requests for permission to reprint to: Rights and Permissions, University of California Press,
Journals Division, 2000 Center St., Ste. 303, Berkeley, CA 94704-1223.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ohr/article-abstract/31/1/1/1388721
by Antioch Colege user
on 18 May 2018

2

ORAL HISTORY REVIEW

Sixty-four-year-old James McWilliams (left) contracted tuberculosis and spat up
blood in the fields where he was held as a farmworker slave. Blue-eyed Robert
Lee Brown (right), named after the Confederate general, was interviewed in an
old shack about his years as a slave.

slaves in the South. Sixty-four-year-old James McWilliams shook
visibly as he described how he literally spat up blood working
on one plantation, managing to escape thanks to an abolitionist
nun who ran her own underground railroad. George McMahon—
who still used his slave nickname, “Cisco”—remembered the
time when he had been sold for cash from his master to his master’s father: “When his Daddy handed him the money, we had
to do what his Daddy say do, ’cuz he done paid for ya.” Robert
Lee Brown, a light-skinned African American with the blue
eyes of an ancestor’s master, was named after the Confederate
general. Interviewed in a small old shack that smelled of rancid
lard, a staple of his impoverished diet, his speech was garbled
with age and alcohol and emotion. “Mister,” he declared, fixing
his interviewer a piercing look, then pointing to the sky visible
through a hole in the roof, “He know I’m telling the truth. And
I can swear it on seven stacks on Bibles. See, ’cuz I been there!
And I know. I know!”
Despite the sweltering summer heat, the interviewer reported
that a chill went down his spine as he listened to the slave narratives. It was an emotional experience on both sides. Some of
the former slaves wept; others shouted; many seemed hardened
to their core. Later, the interviewer wrote of his encounters
with a passionate intensity, fueled by an angry self-righteousness,
a crusading desire to describe the terrible injustices of slavery
which he felt the world had ignored. Young and impressionable—
white, middle class, and sheltered—the interviewer had graduated from college just three years earlier; finally, he felt, he was

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ohr/article-abstract/31/1/1/1388721
by Antioch Colege user
on 18 May 2018

Kissing Cousins

George McMahon (left) had been a star player in the Negro Baseball League but
ended up as a migrant farmworker slave. Len Gaston (right), a 63-year-old former
farmworker slave, said his crewleader beat him with a rubber hose after he tried
to escape from the migrant camp: “He whupped me with it. I couldn’t walk for
’bout two or three weeks.” (1982)

getting an education in life that had not been part of his bookish university curriculum.
But the compiler of these slave narratives was not James
Agee, author of Let Us Now Praise Famous Men, nor another
oral historian from the 1930s. And the slaves were not ancient
survivors from the Civil War. In fact, these interviews took
place nearly a century after Emancipation. The subjects were
migrant farmworkers during the 1980s who had been illegally
held as slaves by their violent crew chief. The interviewer was
not an oral historian but an investigative reporter—the author
of this article.1
Thus the forum here was not oral history but journalism.
Yet the similarities raise some inevitable questions: What is the
difference between oral history and journalism? Where does
one end and the other begin? And what might each learn from
the other?
* * *
“Journalism,” Washington Post publisher Philip Graham
famously said, “is the first draft of history.” Historian Stanley
Kutler, writing before the advent of the Internet and all-news
1

Mark Feldstein, “Prisoners of the Harvest,” WTSP-TV (St. Petersburg, Florida:
July 1982), re-broadcast on ABC News Nightline (Aug. 1983).

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ohr/article-abstract/31/1/1/1388721
by Antioch Colege user
on 18 May 2018

3

4

ORAL HISTORY REVIEW

Stump-legged Eddie Williams told the author that he was forced to work as a
farmworker slave even though he had only one leg and had to hobble on a crutch.
Tears welled in his eyes as he described how his crewleader used his crutch as a
weapon to beat him if he didn’t pick fruit quickly enough: “Dey broke my
crutch.” (1983)

cable television, defined news writing similarly: “history with a
5:00 p.m. deadline.”2 But if journalism is a kind of instant history, what is history itself, other than journalism delayed and
interpreted?
At its most superficial level, of course, are the obvious similarities between journalism and oral history. “Both are concerned with recording information, both are concerned with
accuracy, and both rely on the interview as the primary source
2

Kutler also notes “Voltaire’s dictum that history is a pack of tricks the living play
upon the dead.” He doesn’t say so, but by inference that would make journalism a
pack of tricks the living play upon themselves. Stanley I. Kutler, The Wars of Watergate: The Last Crisis of Richard Nixon (New York: W. W. Norton & Co., 1990), 166,
615.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ohr/article-abstract/31/1/1/1388721
by Antioch Colege user
on 18 May 2018

Kissing Cousins

of information and credibility,” one writer has noted.3 The most
visible difference between the two is time: “The journalist
reports current events. The oral historian is more concerned with
events long after they occurred.” While journalism often alters
events while they are still happening, oral history can alter the
interpretation of those events after they have occurred. Where
journalism’s immediacy may allow for more accuracy in memory,
oral history allows more depth, thoroughness, perspective, and
(perhaps) honesty.4
But the difference between journalism and oral history is
more than just a matter of time. Ultimately, the two have different
purposes, different standards and norms, different techniques. Yet
at the same time, similarities abound; both must grapple with
parallel issues of empathy, ethics, and evidence. Like kissing
cousins, with similar family roots and genetic material, they are
related but separate; and each has much to teach the other.
* * *
The objective of both journalism and oral history is to
record truth. But this lofty philosophical purpose is often as
much a goal as a destination. In reality, both journalists and historians have more practical and proximate objectives. For the
historian, writing history may mean not so much recording truth
as much as trying to interpret what is left of the preserved part
of the recorded part of the remembered part of what happened,
to paraphrase the historian Louis Gottschalk.5 Journalists are
3

John R. Tisdale, “Observational Reporting as Oral History: How Journalists Interpreted the Death and Destruction of Hurricane Audrey,” Oral History Review 27/2
(Summer/Fall 2000): 44. Similarly, Paul Thompson’s description of oral history
applies equally to journalism: “a history built around people” that “thrusts life” into
its subject. Paul Thompson, The Voice of the Past, 3rd ed. (Oxford, UK: Oxford
Univ. Press, 2000), 23.
4
Tisdale, 42.
5
Or, to use the aphorism about oral history, “people talking here and now about the
then and there.” As Louis Gottschalk explained in Understanding History, “Only a
small part of what happened in the past was ever observed. . . . And only a part of
what was observed in the past was remembered by those who observed it; only a
part of what was remembered was recorded; only a part of what was recorded has
survived; only a part of what has survived has come to historians’ attention; only a
part of what has come to their attention is credible; only a part of what is credible
has been grasped; and only a part of what has been grasped can be expounded or
narrated by the historian.” Cited in Donald A. Ritchie, Doing Oral History (New
York: Twayne Publishers, 1995), ix.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ohr/article-abstract/31/1/1/1388721
by Antioch Colege user
on 18 May 2018

5

6

ORAL HISTORY REVIEW

similarly constrained somewhere between their immediate goal
of meeting the next deadline and their larger ambition to educate the citizenry.6
But even if journalists and historians are able to use interviews to record truth, a larger question remains: whose truth
are they telling? “All history,” writes British historian Paul
Thompson, “depends ultimately upon its social purpose.”7 For
Thompson, oral history is not just a methodology but almost a
kind of political cause—transforming the oral historian and history itself by empowering and preserving the world of the forgotten masses. “Since the nature of most existing records is to
reflect the standpoint of authority,” Thompson writes, “it is not
surprising that the judgment of history has more often than not
vindicated the wisdom of the powers that be. Oral history by
contrast makes a much fairer trial possible: witnesses can now
also be called from the under-classes, the unprivileged, and the
defeated. . . . In so doing, oral history has radical implication for
the social message of history as a whole.”8
But Thompson, it seems to me, overstates his case because
he mixes both ends (radical social history) and means (oral
methodology) into his particular politico-historical brew.
After all, oral history can be used to preserve the memories of
6

Leonard Downie, Jr. and Robert G. Kaiser, The News About the News: American
Journalism in Peril (New York: Knopf, 2002), 4, 6.
7
For Thompson, who announces at the outset that his work “is written from a
socialist perspective,” the purpose of history is quite different from mere truth-telling:
“for the historian who wishes to work and write as a socialist, the task must be not
simply to celebrate the working class as it is, but to raise its consciousness. . . . A history is required which leads to action: not to confirm, but to change the world.” Yet
even Thompson acknowledges that oral history interviews have been “regularly
used in a socially and politically conservative manner. . . . Oral history is not necessarily an instrument for change; it depends upon the spirit in which it is used. Nevertheless, oral history certainly can be a means for transforming both the content and
the purpose of history. . . . History becomes, to put it simply, more democratic.”
Thompson, 1, vi, 22, 3, 9.
8
Thompson, 7. Similarly, another scholar wrote that “growing interest” in oral history “is in part a reaction to the undeniable fact that most conventional written history
and oral tradition is elitist history, being largely the history of society’s winners as
they choose that it be remembered.” Yet the same author also noted sardonically
that “[t]he penchant for magnifying the novelty and usefulness of oral historical
research—making its practice as much a movement as a scholarly activity—is characteristic of enthusiasms.” David Henige, Oral Historiography (London: Longman,
1982), 107, 3.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ohr/article-abstract/31/1/1/1388721
by Antioch Colege user
on 18 May 2018

Kissing Cousins

the wealthy and powerful just as readily as the poor and the
powerless—as indeed has been the case in some collections
devoted to the “Great Man” school of political or business history.9 Yet that doesn’t make the methodology of oral history
intrinsically conservative any more than oral interviews of
socialists makes the methodology intrinsically radical. By itself,
the methodology is neutral; its effect depends (in part) on who
is interviewed and how these interviews are used—its “social
purpose,” to use Thompson’s phrase. While written records may
indeed have something of a class bias—because education is
required to be literate—oral history requires only that its subjects be alive and capable of speech.10 That may give a populist
aura to oral history, but in reality it merely throws into relief
9

Modern oral history in the U.S. is generally traced to 1948, when Columbia University established its first oral history project under Prof. Allan Nevins, a former
journalist. “Designed to collect the reminiscences of major figures in contemporary
American public life,” one scholar wrote, “it served as a kind of oral appendix to
the published memoirs of many of these people.” However, the growth of social history in the 1960s soon diversified oral history to the study of non-elites as well.
Henige, 107; Trevor Lummis, Listening to History: The Authenticity of Oral Evidence (Totowa, NJ: Barnes & Noble Books, 1988), 17; and Allan Nevins, “Oral History: How and Why It was Born,” Wilson Library Bulletin 40 (March 1966): 600–1,
republished in David K. Dunaway and Willa K. Baum, eds., Oral History: An Interdisciplinary Anthology (Nashville, TN: American Association for State and Local
History, 1984), 27. See also Eva M. McMahon, Elite Oral History Discourse: A
Study of Cooperation and Coherence (Tuscaloosa, AL: University of Alabama
Press, 1989); and Anthony Selden and Joanna Pappworth, By Word of Mouth:
“Elite” Oral History (London: Methuen, 1983).
10
Political ideology aside, a more familiar debate continues about the reliability of
oral history interviews. While traditional historians express concerns about the bias
and fallibility of memory and prefer written records, oral history interviews offer
several benefits often ignored by critics. “One advantage is that there can be no
doubt as to its authorship,” one scholar has pointed out. “In government circles in
Washington it is standard operation procedure that an important letter may be
the work of many individuals except the one who signs it. . . . Another advantage of
the oral history interview is that it is not a written document and often contains the
freshness and candor which is more typical of direct conversation.” In contrast,
written “[a]rchives are replete with self-serving documents, with edited and doctored diaries and memoranda written ‘for the record.’” Thomas Jefferson’s archival
records of his slave Sally Hemmings, for example, ultimately proved less meaningful than the oral history recollections of her descendants, who passed down the
important truth of their sexual relationship that Jefferson chose not to record—and
would only be proved centuries later by DNA testing. Alice Hoffman, “Reliability
and Validity in Oral History,” Today’s Speech 22 (Winter 1974): 23–7 as republished
in Dunaway and Baum, 72.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ohr/article-abstract/31/1/1/1388721
by Antioch Colege user
on 18 May 2018

7

8

ORAL HISTORY REVIEW

the bias of written history. By itself oral history is no more
liberal or conservative than the pen or any other tool in the
historian’s repertoire.11
The same is also true for journalism. While polemicists argue
whether news media coverage is slanted to the left or right,
these debates are about ends.12 But journalism’s means—the oral
interview—has no real political cast by itself. Some journalists,
like I.F. Stone, have employed the interview for radical purposes.13 Just as history has expanded over the past few decades
to include the “social history” of ordinary people as well as the
chronicles of kings, so journalism in the United States has
changed during the same period, reducing coverage of government hearings and official press conferences while increasing
attention on average people and their concerns. The motivation
for such “news you can use” is admittedly commercial, chasing after ever greater profits through increased ratings and

11

Indeed, Trevor Lummis has argued that oral history can have conservative implications: “Because much working-class reminiscence is not particularly critical of the
system—indeed, it often shows little overt concern with anything other than the
personal— . . . [t]he oral testimonies [of] ordinary people [are often ones] of powerlessness and the necessity to accept ‘things as they were’ rather than to feel militant
about things as they ‘might have been.’” Moreover, “the practice of recording interviews is not in itself a radical activity. It provides one-sided evidence of the lives of
labour but not the movements of capital. It is a method which can provide very
detailed accounts of wages, but is silent on the question of profits.” Lummis, 142,
144–6.
12
Edward S. Herman & Noam Chomsky, Manufacturing Consent: The Political
Economy of the Mass Media (New York: Pantheon Books, 1988); Eric Alterman,
What Liberal Media? The Truth About Bias and the News (New York: Basic Books,
2003); and Bernard Goldberg, Bias: A CBS Insider Exposes How The Media Distort
the News (New York: Perennial, 2003).
13
Despite his leftist bent, Stone actually preferred written documents as his principal source material—in part, perhaps, because his maverick politics prevented
access to the elite policy makers Stone liked to criticize. In contrast, investigative
journalist Bob Woodward has relied primarily on interviews, perhaps because his
more establishment pedigree allows greater high-level contacts. Investigative
reporters typically use both oral and written methodologies, but often prefer one or
the other based largely on individual temperament. Andrew Patner, I. F. Stone: A
Portrait (New York: Anchor Books, 1988), passim; Leonard Downie, Jr., The New
Muckrakers (Washington, D.C.: New Republic Book Co., 1976), chp. 1; Ken Metzler, Newsgathering (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1979), 133; Stephen Hess,
The Washington Reporter (Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution, 1981), passim.;
and C.A. Tugle, Forest Carr, and Suzanne Huffman, Broadcast News Handbook,
2nd ed. (New York: McGraw-Hill, 2004), 66.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ohr/article-abstract/31/1/1/1388721
by Antioch Colege user
on 18 May 2018

Kissing Cousins

circulation; nonetheless, it has made news coverage more
focused on ordinary people than it was in the past.14
But even while both journalists and oral historians use
interviews as a means to pursue truth, they do not really have
the same ultimate ends. Neither do police or psychiatrists or
anthropologists—even though they, too, employ interviews and
try to ascertain truth.15 Indeed, all of these different disciplines
have different purposes. The psychiatrist seeks not just truth,
but catharsis and healing; the policeman, contradictions and
perhaps a confession; the anthropologist, a broad view of how a
society operates. Similarly, while oral history’s fundamental mission is to try to recapture the past, journalism cannot be divorced
from the fact that it is ultimately a commercial vehicle for selling advertisements. However much official journalistic ethos
may claim to value truth, the business dictates of increasingly
corporate journalism inevitably alter what truths journalists are
allowed to present and how they are presented.16
This difference in purpose frequently leads to differences in
technique. At a minimum, the average, harried daily news reporter
simply doesn’t have the time—or the need—to conduct indepth interviews the way an oral historian does. Such journalists,
David K. Dunaway wrote, are
taught to conduct an interview on a moment’s notice, under
adverse circumstances, and to ferret out a story, overcoming the
reluctance of the subject with a combination of bravado, cunning,
and persistence. He or she reached the controversial points fast,
evokes a show of emotions, and presents the material all in a
short time. The professional oral historian, on the other hand . . .
seeks historical detail in interviews, not emotional reactions; relying on the subject’s cooperation and on lengthy research, the
interview proceeds at a more gradual pace. . . . The final product

14
Melvin Mencher, News Reporting and Writing, 8th ed. (New York: McGraw Hill,
2000), 71; and Carole Rich, Writing and Reporting the News, 4th ed. (Belmont, CA:
Wadsworth, 2003), 405–8, 465.
15
For an interesting comparison of oral history and anthropology, see Micaela Di
Leonardo, “Oral History as Ethnographic Encounter,” Oral History Review 15
(Spring 1987): 1–20.
16
See, for example, Ben Bagdikian, The Media Monopoly (Boston: Beacon Press,
1987) and Robert W. McChesney, Rich Media, Poor Democracy: Communications
Politics in Dubious Times (Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press, 1999). For a contrary view, see Robert Samuelson, “The Myth of Big Media,” Newsweek (Aug. 11,
2003).

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ohr/article-abstract/31/1/1/1388721
by Antioch Colege user
on 18 May 2018

9

10

ORAL HISTORY REVIEW

of a thorough oral history session will be a narrator-approved transcript, deposited in a publicly accessible library or institution. . . . In
[broadcast journalism] the end product is also a tape, but one
composed of a series of interviews, edited, encapsulated, rearranged, and mixed together with sound effects, music, and sound
ambience [sic]. . . . This highly crafted tape is often all that is preserved . . . and it is judged by immediate audience response and
by the production values demonstrated—not by its value to future
generations of scholars.17

To be sure, interviewing fundamentals are largely the same
for journalists and oral historians. Both stress the importance of
background research and careful preparation before an interview takes place;18 both try to make their subjects feel at ease
and establish rapport by using verbal cues and body language
to encourage, empathize, and show respect.19 Journalism and
oral history manuals both emphasize beginning interviews
gently, asking single but direct open-ended questions,20 listening
closely to ask appropriate follow-up questions, approaching
topics from different angles, postponing sensitive questions,21
and ending on an upbeat note.22
Similarly, both journalists and oral historians use photographs or walking tours to jog the memories of their subjects; both
wrestle with how to minimize the distraction of tape recorders,
17

Dunaway and Blum, 337–9.
Thompson, 222.
19
“Accept a cup of tea if it is offered, and be prepared to chat about the family and
photographs.” Thompson, 240. As for body language, the rules are somewhat different for broadcast journalists, who generally try to avoid nodding in agreement or
other movements that might imply an editorial position. See also Charles T. Morrissey, “The Two-Sentence Format as an Interviewing Technique in Oral History Fieldwork,” Oral History Review 15 (Spring 1987): fn4.
20
Morrissey, for example, stresses not to put words in the mouths of subjects (“don’t
seek verification of preconclusions”) and to be clear by not ending questions with
examples (otherwise “the respondent’s answer will address the examples instead of
the question they are meant to illustrate”). Morrissey, 47, fn9. See also Akiba A.
Cohen, The Television News Interview (Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications, 1987).
21
Experienced interviewers, however, suggest that sensitive questions may be
brought up earlier “when the interviewee helpfully alludes to the matter.” Morrissey, fn14.
22
“An interview which ends on a relaxed note is more likely to be remembered as
pleasant, and lead on to another.” Thompson, 240. A confrontational investigative
reporter once offered a less lofty reason for the same strategy: “You never know
who is packing heat.” NBC correspondent Mark Nykanen to author (Phoenix, Arizona: Summer 1979).
18

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ohr/article-abstract/31/1/1/1388721
by Antioch Colege user
on 18 May 2018

Kissing Cousins

Like an oral historian’s tape recorder, a television journalist’s lights and cameras
are essential tools that can be distracting to interviewees. Author interviewing
homeless Egyptian squatters for CNN at garbage dump in Cairo, 1991.

television lights, or simple note-taking.23 Both are acutely aware
how the exact wording of a question can utterly change the
phrasing of an answer;24 both debate how close to get to their
subjects and whether youthful ignorance will extract more honesty than seasoned expertise.25 And both entail elements of
23

Thompson, 232. Investigative reporters are particularly leery of spooking sources
by taking notes in front of them, as Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein explained in
their classic All the President’s Men (New York: Warner Books, 1974). The result of
this strategy is that investigative reporters must then reconstruct their notes—and
quotes—after the fact, diminishing reliability. Television journalists have a different
approach, usually conducting a “pre-interview” to find out what the subject will say
on-camera before the final interview is actually taped. In the final minutes before
the taping begins, a television reporter will often make chit-chat to try to avoid discussing interview topics until the cameras are rolling; this approach best preserves
spontaneity during the taped interview. Mencher, chp. 15.
24
Clever journalists will often phrase their questions carefully to elicit a desired
answer; whether this technique helps lead to truth, or manipulatively obscures it, is
a matter of opinion. In addition, as Thompson points out, “interviewers carry into
the interview both their own expectations and a social manner which affect their
findings.” Thompson, 138–39.
25
Thompson refers to this as the difference between an “outsider” and an “insider”
conducting the interview: “The insider knows the way round, can be less easily
fooled, understands the nuances, and starts with far more useful contacts and, hope-

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ohr/article-abstract/31/1/1/1388721
by Antioch Colege user
on 18 May 2018

11

12

ORAL HISTORY REVIEW

performance—especially for broadcast journalists.26 Above all
else, both know that every interview is a unique, spontaneous
interaction for which no pre-existing rules can be definitive.
In some ways, journalists and historians are similarly divided
against themselves. While traditional historians and print journalists most value the written word, oral historians and broadcast journalists place more of a premium on spoken communication. In words that could well apply to television journalism
as well as oral history, one scholar writes that “the recording is a
far more reliable and accurate account of an encounter than a
purely written record. All the exact words used are there as
they were spoken; and added to them are social clues, the
nuances of uncertainty, humor, or pretense, as well as the texture
fully, as an established person of good faith. . . . [T]he outsider can ask for the obvious to be explained; while the insider, who may in fact be misinformed in assuming
the answer, does not ask for fear of seeming foolish. The outsider also keeps an
advantage in being outside the local social network, more easily maintaining a position of neutrality, and so may be spoken to in true confidentiality, with less subsequent anxiety.” In journalism, CNN host Larry King takes pride in his nontraditional interviewing approach, cherishing his role as outsider to the point that
he deliberately does not read the books of authors he will interview on his television show. King argues that this allows him to maintain a proper distance from the
subject and bring to the interview an ignorant curiosity that reflects that of his audience. Thompson also points out how differences of race, sex, and class—as well as
insider or outsider status—affect the content of interviews. Thompson, 140–41.
26
Print journalists are not necessarily immune from issues of performance, either. New
Yorker writer Janet Malcolm famously wrote that journalistic interviews are a kind of
“confidence game” in which reporters act like chameleons, changing their colors to
suit their audience. Malcolm, The Journalist and the Murderer (New York: Knopf,
1990). Print journalist Bill Dedman, winner of the Pulitzer prize, has described the
purpose of an interview as “getting people to tell you things they wouldn’t tell somebody else.” In both journalism and oral history, performance is affected by the interview location and the presence of other individuals. For the oral historian, “an
interview at home will increase the pressure of ‘respectable’ home-centered ideals; an
interview in a pub is more likely to emphasize dare-devilry and fun; and an interview
in the workplace will introduce the influence of work conventions and attitudes.” For
the television journalist, the interview location also provides visual reinforcement: a
hospital backdrop reminds viewers of a physician’s medical expertise or a nightclub
reinforces a bouncer’s unsavory demeanor. In both history and journalism, “[t]he
presence of another person at the interview not only inhibits candour, but subtly pressurizes towards a socially acceptable testimony.” Yet reluctant subjects—from child
abuse victims to whistleblowers—may be emboldened by being interviewed in a supportive group setting. Thompson, 142, 234; and James S. Ettema and Theodore
Glasser, Custodians of Conscience (New York: Columbia University Press, 1998), 37.
For discussion of another kind of interview performance, see Della Pollock, “Telling
the Told: Performing Like a Family,” Oral History Review 18 (Fall 1990): 1–36.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ohr/article-abstract/31/1/1/1388721
by Antioch Colege user
on 18 May 2018

Kissing Cousins

of dialect.”27 Oral history and broadcast journalism share an
ability to communicate on multiple levels simultaneously—
verbal, visual, and textual—as well as a corresponding power to
reach more people, literate and illiterate alike.
Nonetheless, the interviewing techniques of journalists and
oral historians differ in some crucial ways. For example, while
oral historians are trained not to be flustered by silence during
an interview,28 journalists often abhor such a vacuum—whether
they are print journalists operating under a tight deadline or
live television interviewers for whom there is no greater sin
than “dead” airtime. Similarly, oral historians are taught that
“good interviewers never shine, only their interviews do.”29 But
journalists typically shun such monologue-like interviews as
boring or inefficient uses of time; television especially encourages a two-way dialogue where the questions by the star correspondent (literally known as the “talent”) sometimes are valued
more than the answers of the less famous interviewee.30
Reportorial rudeness is often another big difference between
journalists and historians.31 Partly it is a matter of mechanics:
journalists conduct numerous interviews during a day and don’t
have as much time for pleasantries. Partly it is a matter of culture: the non-profit world of academia is simply more genteel
than a profit-conscious sharp-elbowed newsroom or a noisy
news conference where voices literally must be raised to be
heard. But often, journalistic aggression can be a deliberate—
and sometimes highly effective—tactic for getting information.

27

Thompson, 126.
“[D]o not allow yourself to feel embarrassed by pauses,” Thompson says. “An
interview is not a dialogue, or a conversation.” Italics in original. Thompson, 238.
29
“Notes on Interviewing,” and “Ten Tips for Interviewers,” Southern Oral History
Program, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, www.sohp.org/howto/guide.
30
Robert L. Hilliard, Writing for Television, Radio, and New Media (Belmont, CA:
Wadsworth, 2000), 224. When I was an on-camera television correspondent, I
would frequently ask questions that were deliberately redundant but which I felt
helped reinforce a point my interviewee was making: So what you’re saying is [summarize]? It’s as simple as that? Are you sure about that? Such staged questions are
not really needed by the oral historian.
31
Such rudeness is often more for public show than a measure of true feelings; witness the importance of the Washington reporter’s famous (often liquid) expense
account lunch with sources, similar to Thompson’s suggestion that the oral historian
provide the interviewee “an ample lunch with drink.” Thompson, 241.
28

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ohr/article-abstract/31/1/1/1388721
by Antioch Colege user
on 18 May 2018

13

14

ORAL HISTORY REVIEW

Indeed, while oral historians rarely try to push unwilling subjects into interviews, some journalists simply do not take no for
an answer. Investigative reporters especially can be experts at
getting information by virtually any means necessary; they
might cajole, flatter, trick, seduce, infiltrate, or bully. Only lawbreaking and paying for information is proscribed, and even
these strictures are occasionally set aside.32
Unlike journalists, oral historians are coached to be gentle
in their interviews.33 According to oral historian Charles Morrissey, “[a]n adversary relationship might be fruitful in other
types of interview situations—Mike Wallace on television’s
‘Sixty Minutes’ or a trial lawyer interrogating a witness in a
courtroom trial, trying to undermine the credibility of a witness.
But collegiality is effective in an oral history relationship if for
no other reason than the fact that the witness in this exchange
is not compelled to grant an interview.”34 Of course, no one is
compelled to give journalists an interview, either; but they have
more power to exert pressure for interviews—and through
adverse publicity punish those who do not cooperate—than do
oral historians.
As a result, historians generally prefer a more indirect style
of interviewing, especially on touchy topics. “Since money is the
most sensitive subject in American culture,” Morrissey argues,
“the worst way an interviewer can pose such a sensitive question would be a blunt and testy formulation like this: Where
did you get the money? The answer might be a sharp rejoinder:

32

“The legendary Harry Romanoff, former city editor of the defunct Chicago Daily
American, once managed to interview mass murderer Richard Speck’s mother by
pretending to be Speck’s attorney,” two scholars wrote. “Stories abound about the
reporter who calls the scene of some tragedy and tells the voice at the other end,
‘This is Coroner O’Bannion. How many dead ones you got?’ After a pause, according to the story, the voice replies, ‘No, this is Coroner O’Bannion. Who the hell are
you?’ Often reporters use their own names but imply they are someone else: ‘This is
Jones calling from headquarters. Who’d you arrest out there?’” David Anderson
and Peter Benjaminson, Investigative Reporting (Bloomington: Indiana University
Press, 1976), 109. See also Jack Anderson with James Boyd, Confessions of a Muckraker (New York: Ballantine Books, 1979), passim.
33
“[I]t is particularly important not to contradict or argue with an informant,”
Thompson argues. Thompson, 239.
34
Morrissey, 45.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ohr/article-abstract/31/1/1/1388721
by Antioch Colege user
on 18 May 2018

Kissing Cousins

That’s none of your business.”35 Morrissey advocates what
he calls a “two step format,” in which the first part of the question consists of a sympathetic statement (“It is understandable why you chose discretion over disclosure when that decision was announced”) followed by the gently worded question
(“but now that need no longer persists. What did cause that
decision?”). 36
To a seasoned journalist, however, such an approach is
anathema—for a number of reasons. First, it violates norms of
objectivity by expressing an opinion, implicitly or explicitly
endorsing the interviewee’s conduct. Second, it implies deference if not outright servility to public officials, with whom journalists believe they should have an equal relationship. Finally,
by journalistic standards, “That’s none of your business” is a
perfectly acceptable answer, one that may be both more commercially entertaining to readers and viewers, and more enlightening in the truest sense of capturing the interviewee’s real
feelings.
Indeed, journalists often deliberately provoke or inflame
their subjects. Mike Wallace, the CBS correspondent on “Sixty
Minutes,” compares interviewing to a battle; his razor-edged
questions are his weapons of choice. Italian magazine reporter
Oriana Fallaci sees interviews as drama; she deliberately insults
and accuses her subjects to create an emotional reaction.37
While questioning Iran’s Ayatollah Khomeini, for example,

35

Morrissey, 51. But not all oral historians advocate neutral questioning. Temple
University Prof. William Cutler III acknowledged that while questioners “should
always try to know their biases and conceal them as far as possible,” nonetheless
sometimes “the leading question” can “improve the accuracy of any interview,
including those done by oral historians.” Cutler cited a public opinion study that
found “the same people in a test group gave a comparably small number of distorted answers to both leading and straightforward inquiries.” Cutler, “Accuracy in
Oral History Interviewing,” Historical Methods Newsletter 3 (June 1970): 1–7,
republished in Dunaway and Baum, 82–3.
36
Morrissey, 51. However, one danger of Morrissey’s two-step approach is that it
can easily lead to the interviewer’s putting words in the subject’s mouth.
37
Other metaphors used by journalists for their interviews include “a dance at its
best” (ABC’s Diane Sawyer) and sex (there is “less foreplay” in “a one-night stand
[than] a long-term affair,” says writer Ken Auletta). Jack Huber and Dean Diggins,
Interviewing America’s Top Interviewers: Nineteen Top Interviewers Tell All About
What They Do (New York: Birch Lane Press, 1991), 180.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ohr/article-abstract/31/1/1/1388721
by Antioch Colege user
on 18 May 2018

15

16

ORAL HISTORY REVIEW

Fallaci called him a “tyrant” and pulled off the full-length veil
that women were forced to wear in Iran.38 “My interviews are
pieces de theatre,” Fallaci says. “[M]y approach is that of a
writer, of a novelist, of a playwright.”39 Fallaci excoriates interviewers who use a more gentle approach: “[S]ince they are cowards, they start with ‘Do you love your mother? Does your
mother love you? Do you like summer or winter? When they
are at the door, ready to escape, they say, ‘Did you steal the
money last night?’”40
Obviously, Oriani Fallaci and Mike Wallace are extreme
cases, quasi-entertainers in a world of commercial journalism
where the lines between show business and news business are
increasingly blurred. These extreme examples illustrate the
increasing trend toward tabloid fare in much of contemporary
journalism.41 Still, most journalists strive for neutrality.42 “The
adversarial approach is good for the soul,” argues journalist Nick
Pileggi, “but bad for the story.”43 Yet while it may be tempting

38

Khomeini fled until Fallaci put the chador back on her face. The Italian journalist
was similarly provocative with Ethiopia’s elderly dictator Haile Selassie, who was
notoriously sensitive about his age. Fallaci taunted him, saying, “You’re very old
and you’re afraid of dying aren’t you?” Selassie started yelling and ended the interview but Fallaci was unrepentant: “I needed the vendetta, the revenge” against the
dictator, she said. Fallaci, 23–27.
39
Paradoxically, Fallaci notes that interviewing “has all the earmarks of honesty and
can be the most dishonest thing on earth. Each time you read an interview, you
should get a copy of the tape to see how things really went.” Fallaci, 22.
40
Fallaci claims that if she could interview God, she would ask: “Given the fact
that you are a bastard, because you have invented a life that dies, why did you give
us death?” Fallaci, 15, 24. For more on Fallaci, see Santo L. Arico, Oriana Fallaci:
The Woman and the Myth (Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois Univ. Press, 1998).
41
See, for example, Downie and Kaiser, passim; and Neil Postman, Amusing Ourselves to Death: Public Discourse in the Age of Show Business (New York: Viking,
1985), passim.
42
David H. Weaver and G. Cleveland Wilhoit, The American Journalist in the 1990s:
U.S. News People at the End of an Era (Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1996), 137, 170.
43
Huber, 7. During my own work as a journalist, I often found that despite the television interviewer’s customary antipathy to dead airtime, silence can elicit the most
damning admissions of all. “I don’t charge extra for rats, they come free when I rent
the property,” one slumlord eventually told me on-camera. Similarly, a negligent
gynecologist responded to my silence by stating, “Oh, I’ve lacerated many women’s
[sic] uteruses, this is no big deal.” Mark Feldstein, “See No Evil,” WTSP-TV (St.
Petersburg, FL: March, 1981); and Mark Feldstein, “Investigation of Dr. Milan
Vuitch,” WDVM-TV (Washington, D.C.: Nov. 1984).

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ohr/article-abstract/31/1/1/1388721
by Antioch Colege user
on 18 May 2018

Kissing Cousins

to dismiss adversarial tactics merely as self-promoting theatrics
that generate more heat than light, this confrontational style
has led political leaders to blurt out embarrassing admissions
that they undoubtedly would not have acknowledged in a more
conventional interview.44 While an adversarial approach would
be disastrously inappropriate for social history interviews of,
say, uneducated peasants, it can elicit from elites uniquely passionate, spontaneous truths that would otherwise never be
unearthed. Sometimes fire’s heat can also produce light.45
* * *
In the same way that journalism and oral history both share
similar techniques, so, too, do they share similar issues about
empathy, ethics, and evidence. In both disciplines, empathy can
be not just a tactic to improve interviewing results but a genuine by-product of the interviewing process. “I wanted to write
about her,” historian Jacquelyn Dowd Hall explained of one of
her subjects; “I also wanted to befriend her.”46 This dilemma is
classic in journalism as well—how close can a reporter get to a
source?—and is often centered around notions of objectivity.
Sometimes, the lack of empathy—even loathing—toward a subject is what stands out, for both journalist and historian. Interviewers may also discover the truth of Hannah Arendt’s classic
characterization of evil as surprisingly banal.47

44

A classic example is a Fallaci interview with former Secretary of State Henry
Kissinger, whom she goaded into immodestly revealing that he fancied himself a
“cowboy who leads the wagon train by riding ahead alone” on his horse. Huber, 29.
45
Even Thompson seems to concede this point, but only in cases of politically incorrect interviewees: “Fascists and capitalists who knew which side I was on often gave
me much more vivid and motivated accounts and explanations than if they had
blandly assumed I shared their party or class line.” But why should interviewees
from the left be exempt from this more adversarial interviewing style? Thompson
concedes that the famous “good cop/bad cop” style of interrogation—also used
with great effectiveness by investigative journalists—has its usefulness in oral history: “This argumentative technique clearly depends on some sort of common
membership of a social group, and partly on knowing exactly how far the challenge
may be pressed.” Thompson, 243–44.
46
Jacquelyn Dowd Hall, “Open Secrets: Memory, Imagination, and the Refashioning of Southern Identity,” American Quarterly, Vol. 50, No. 1 (March 1998):
120.
47
See, for example, Kathleen M. Blee, “Evidence, Empathy, and Ethics: Lessons from
Oral Histories of the Klan,” Journal of American History 80 (Sept. 1993): 596–606.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ohr/article-abstract/31/1/1/1388721
by Antioch Colege user
on 18 May 2018

17

18

ORAL HISTORY REVIEW

Both journalists and oral historians face issues of evidence, empathy, and ethics.
Here the author interviews a retarded man who was sexually abused by his foster
father and later died of AIDS.

As for ethics, journalists and academics tend to look at the
subject differently.48 For journalists, ethics is largely a matter of
weighing which means can be used to achieve which ends: for
example, is it acceptable to “bluff” a source into revealing something incriminating—telling a lie in order to uncover the truth?49
For historians, ethical debates do not center on such issues of
technique—which are generally much more straightforward—
but on the interviewer’s relationship with the subject. Thus, academics worry about the often unequal status between interviewer and interviewee. “I felt guilty for ‘stealing’ informants’
private lives for my own gain,” one social scientist wrote, “and
attempted to give something back by demonstrating how I valued these individuals and their narratives.”50 Journalists are not
48

Not completely, of course. One commonality: the debate about whether to “clean
up” a subject’s ungrammatical quotes in transcripts, which are generally more
accessible than original recordings. Here, the debate often centers on whether the
accurate transcribing of vernacular is a form of elitist condescension. See Di
Leonardo, 14.
49
John Brady, The Craft of Interviewing (Cincinnati: Writer’s Digest Books, 1976),
94; and Sissela Bok, Lying: Moral Choice in Public and Private Life (New York:
Pantheon Books, 1978), 107–22.
50
Brady, 94. One academic even worried about the ethics of using President Richard Nixon’s White House tape recordings since they were made surreptitiously “in a

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ohr/article-abstract/31/1/1/1388721
by Antioch Colege user
on 18 May 2018

Kissing Cousins

immune from this concern, but typically tend to view it less as
an ethical issue than as a practical one; constrained by limits of
time and space, reporters focus largely on what will help or
hinder their news-gathering. “Tell them everything, the most
personal details about yourself and your life,” journalist Richard
Reeves coolly advises. “As human beings, [subjects] respond in
kind, only their answers appear in print.”51 When journalists try
to “give something back,” it is more often because of a calculated strategy than feelings of guilt; thus television producers
hand out baseball caps and other trinkets to their more lowly
interview subjects while investigative reporters swap confidential information with their elite sources.
Similarly, while journalists often joke that the range of their
stories varies from “the White House to the outhouse,” oral historians approach the question of social mixing with much greater
solemnity. “Information can bring together people from different
social classes and age groups who would otherwise rarely meet,
let alone get to know each other closely,” Thompson observes.
“And through entering into the lives of their informants, they
gain more understanding of values which they do not share, and
often respect for the courage shown in lives much less privileged
than their own.”52 Journalists, on the other hand, rarely wax
poetic about this important aspect of their work; maybe they are
more hardened—or simply less reflective—about it.53
* * *
manner that violates the code passed unanimously” by the Oral History Association. “Anguished objections to Nixon-as-historian are based on his violations of
every tenent [sic] in [the OHA’s] Goals and Guidelines. . . . As users, we want them
made available to the public. As producers, we can never approve of the methods
used by the White House.” Such ethical fastidiousness, however well-intentioned,
seems misplaced. What more reliable historical source could possibly exist than
real-time recordings uncontaminated by subsequent sanitizing or memory failures?
Such a unique historical treasure trove deserves to be embraced by historians and
journalists alike. Amelia Fry, “Reflections on Ethics,” Oral History Review 3 (1975):
17–28, as republished in Dunaway and Blum, 151, 161.
51
Brady, 53–54.
52
Thompson, 12.
53
Journalists rarely explain their methodology in any depth in articles or broadcasts.
Some reporters have discussed their techniques in memoirs, but as a result have
been criticized within the profession as being self-aggrandizing. These include
Woodward and Bernstein, All the President’s Men; and Anderson and Boyd, Confessions of a Muckraker.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ohr/article-abstract/31/1/1/1388721
by Antioch Colege user
on 18 May 2018

19

20

ORAL HISTORY REVIEW

Perhaps the most important difference between journalists
and historians is in their approach toward evidence. To be sure,
both disciplines try to sift carefully through oral and written
materials, evaluating whether individual anecdotes and stories
symbolize larger trends and truths.54 Both grapple with the quandary of whether to use anonymous or disguised sources, weighing whether the additional information gathered is worth the
dangers such concealed evidence-gathering brings with it.55 And
both are characterized by practitioners who range the gamut
from superb to shoddy.56
But unlike journalism, where articles and broadcasts publicize only small portions of interviews, oral history often makes
its interviews available for public inspection in their entirety. This
is a crucial difference in two important respects. First, unlike
journalism, where interview “sequences are edited, and shortened and intercut with other material,” oral history interviews
“should be seen as the creation of an original document or artifact. Historians would not be pleased, on discovering an important written document for the first time, to find that pieces
had been physically and irretrievably removed—so why accept
54

See, for example, Samuel Schrager, “What is Social in Oral History?” International Journal of Oral History 4 (June 1983): 76–98.
55
Journalists routinely denounce overuse of anonymous sources even as they
engage in it on a daily basis. Similarly, while many oral historians (like Donald
Ritchie) criticize anonymity, others (like Theodore Rosengarten) disguise their
sources. Ritchie, 100; Rosengarten, All God’s Dangers: The Life of Nate Shaw (New
York: Avon Books, 1974). For a deconstruction of the journalistic abuse of anonymous sources in a fascinating case study, see Steven Brill, “Pressgate,” Brill’s Content (Aug. 1998): 122–51. Anthropologists frequently disguise their sources but
more unequivocally defend the practice as necessary to pry out “harmful or embarrassing facts. . . . The tradition of protecting informants’ identities is . . . deeply and
unselfconsciously part of anthropological training.” Di Leonardo, 5.
56
By rigorous journalistic standards—an admitted oxymoron in many cases—some
works of oral history can be viewed as wanting. For example, a close reading of
Constance Curry’s oral history of desegregation suggests that she repeats hearsay
second-hand quotes without identifying them as such; restates her subjects’ rendition of events as unqualified fact without attribution; and “cleans up” interview
quotes so that subjects speak with seamless eloquence. Curry, Silver Rights (New
York: Harcourt, 1995), 10, 30, 70, 87, passim. Jack Dougherty has also criticized
Curry for failing to interview other families involved in desegregation, an omission
Dougherty claims is a typical failing of oral history; however, this would once again
seem more the failure of an individual practitioner than of oral history as a methodology. Dougherty, “From Anecdote to Analysis: Oral Interviews and New Scholarship in Educational History,” Journal of American History 86 (Sept. 1999): 712–23.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ohr/article-abstract/31/1/1/1388721
by Antioch Colege user
on 18 May 2018

Kissing Cousins

unqualified edited testimony?”57 Second, by preserving the entirety of oral history interviews, other scholars can check the
material for accuracy, context, and nuance.58 Unlike journalism,
oral history can be independently verified—a fundamental
requirement of scientific inquiry.59
This approach has a downside, of course; it is time-consuming, costly, and can easily lead to wasted effort. “With the
appearance of the tape recorder, a monster with the appetite
of a tapeworm, we now have, though its creature Oral History,
an artificial survival of trivia of appalling proportions,” complained Barbara Tuchman, the Pulitzer Prize-winning writer of
popular history. “[W]ith all sorts of people being invited
merely to open their mouths, and ramble effortlessly and endlessly into a tape recorder, prodded daily by an acolyte of Oral
History, a few veins of gold and a vast mass of trash are being
preserved which would otherwise have gone to dust. We are
drowning ourselves in unneeded information.”60 Of course,
what information turns out to be “unneeded” lies—like beauty—
in the eye of the beholder. Perhaps future historians will mine
oral history interviews and discover gold in what Tuchman
dismissed as garbage. At least that possibility is preserved,
thanks to oral history collections, for posterity.
* * *
Like kissing cousins, then, journalism and oral history are
both related and separate. Their reliance on interviews leads to
similar if not identical techniques; their interactions with human
subjects raise similar issues of empathy and ethics. Yet the two
disciplines operate in different spheres of time and ultimately

57
Ken Howarth, Oral History (Gloucestershire, UK: Sutton Publishing, 1999), 8–9.
British spelling is unchanged.
58
“Availability for general research, reinterpretation, and verification defines oral
history,” Ritchie writes. “By preserving the tapes and transcripts of their interviews,
oral historians seek to leave as complete, candid, and reliable a record as possible.”
Ritche, 6.
59
Not always, of course; oral histories of non-elites often cannot be verified by written documentation. However, by preserving the tapes and transcripts, at least the
oral histories themselves can be authenticated.
60
Oral history novices, Charles Morrissey observed wryly, often confuse the tape
recorder and the vacuum cleaner. Dunaway and Blum, 76, 116.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ohr/article-abstract/31/1/1/1388721
by Antioch Colege user
on 18 May 2018

21

22

ORAL HISTORY REVIEW

have different ends. Their very differences of purpose highlight
how each might learn from the other. However unlikely and
commercially unnecessary, journalism would do well to emulate
oral history’s exhaustive and nuanced approach to research
evidence—most especially its preservation of interview transcripts that allow public inspection and verification. Conversely,
the oral historian would do well to emulate the journalist’s
more seasoned approach to interviewing—increasing the quantity of interviews and expanding the range of interviewing
approaches, including use of adversarial encounters. Journalism
and oral history will always be cousins, not twins; but their very
similarities help showcase their unique differences.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ohr/article-abstract/31/1/1/1388721
by Antioch Colege user
on 18 May 2018

