MEDIA PRACTICE AND EDUCATION
2019, VOL. 20, NO. 1, 67–86
https://doi.org/10.1080/25741136.2018.1464740

‘Better than a pill’: digital storytelling as a narrative process for
refugee women
Caroline Lenette a, Mark Broughb, Robert D. Schweitzer
Kate Murray c and Lyn Vromans c

c

, Ignacio Correa-Velezb,

a

Forced Migration Research Network @UNSW, School of Social Sciences, University of New South Wales
Sydney, Kensington, NSW, Australia; bSchool of Public Health and Social Work, Queensland University of
Technology, Kelvin Grove, QLD, Australia; cSchool of Psychology and Counselling, Queensland University of
Technology, Kelvin Grove, QLD, Australia
ABSTRACT

ARTICLE HISTORY

Digital storytelling is a valuable and ethical research tool to
engage in collaborative research with refugee women. This
paper recounts how digital storytelling was used in a mixedmethods study on settlement, to document the journeys of
women who entered Australia through the Woman at Risk
program in 2014–2015. Instead of merely asking a series of
questions, the digital storytelling process extended our
qualitative inquiry as an approach that valued the women’s own
memories, interests, and hopes. The methodology represents a
meaningful way of engaging in collaborative research, where
participating women were not just storytellers but valued as
active co-constructors of new knowledge. We outline each of
three digital narratives as a ‘whole’ to consider what we can
learn from a storytelling process where women with complex
circumstances are privileged as protagonists-and-producers of
their own stories. We argue that it is worth critically reflecting
on the concepts the women propose for themselves as
meaningful ways to articulate their lives, when we relinquish the
researcher role as question asker to enter a space alongside
participants and listen intently. Our paper highlights the broader
potential of digital storytelling particularly in mental health
research in collaboration with refugee participants.

Received 24 February 2017
Accepted 26 July 2017
KEYWORDS

Digital storytelling; refugee
women; settlement;
narrative; Women at Risk

Introduction
Our paper highlights the value of digital storytelling as an appropriate and ethical tool
for research engagement with refugee women with complex circumstances. Unlike most
research methods, which potentially direct participants’ accounts and impose problem
concepts on participants, the narrative processes intrinsic to digital storytelling enable
each woman to re-author her own story, using both spoken word and pictures. In
the creation of the story, the participant engages with her subjective self and articulates
her own personal meanings of specific events in her life. This ‘preferred story’ of self is
further strengthened through viewers bearing witness, which is embedded in an interCONTACT Caroline Lenette

c.lenette@unsw.edu.au

© 2018 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group

68

C. LENETTE ET AL.

subjective weave. Within this encounter, digital storytelling carries the possibility of
being transformative and reparative.
We focus here on a digital storytelling project embedded within a larger mixedmethods longitudinal study investigating the settlement experiences of ‘at-risk’ refugee
women in Brisbane, Australia, in 2014–2017. We describe digital storytelling as a dialogical
process which recounts participants’ stories to give meaning to the journeys of women
who entered Australia through the Woman at Risk program. We deliberately outline
each story as a ‘whole’ and consider what can be learnt from a process where women
with complex circumstances are privileged as protagonists-and-producers of their own
stories. We wish to acknowledge the value of facilitating opportunities for participants
to transform ‘knowing’ into ‘telling’ (Sandelowski 1991) through digital storytelling as a
narrative approach that emphasises thinking with rather than simply about people’s
stories (Clandinin 2013, 29). Such visual ethnographic approaches can foster the emergence of multiple and alternative interpretations of socio-cultural experiences, as participants are more likely to share their stories fully when they actively engage as coconstructors of knowledge and maintain ownership over their life narratives (Lenette,
Brough, and Cox 2013; Lenette 2017; Ellis et al. 2007).
The value of the ‘whole’ story has a number of layers, including the fundamental
concern of a plot, which is ‘the narrative structure through which people understand
and describe the relationship among the events and choices of their lives’ (Polkinghorne
1995, 7). In all three digital stories we recount below, there is a plot with various characters enveloped in unfolding events, and where the central protagonist, the storyteller
herself, comes up against major biographical disruption, which needs resolution.
However, a second layer of meaning can only be derived through the story as a
‘whole’. The digital stories reflect a relatively unusual process within the dominant
schemas of academic inquiry: instead of asking a series of questions, the digital storytelling process allowed us to enter a space alongside the women to facilitate storytelling
according to their own memories, interests, and hopes. Crucial to this process was that
the women were not ‘prescribed’ a particular storyline or theme to follow as a starting
point. This ‘nonsequential’ design (Johnson and Kendrick 2016) encouraged participants
to think about what stories they wanted to share with others, based on their thoughts,
feelings, memories, and experiences.
In this paper, we highlight the broader potential of digital storytelling particularly in
mental health research in collaboration with refugee participants. While narrative
approaches are surprisingly limited in this field, there appears to be growing interest
in the area of refugee health (see Lenette, Brough, and Cox 2013; De Haene, Grietens,
and Verschueren 2010) where mental health concerns receive a great deal of attention. A key criticism though is the tendency to impose outsider categories as ‘representations’ of refugee experiences (Lenette, Brough, and Cox 2013). Indeed, there
is a plethora of concepts typically used in refugee studies concerning trauma, posttraumatic stress, abuse, deficits, and needs, as well as mental health, well-being, resilience, and ‘successful’ resettlement, to guide our thinking. We argue here that it is
worth critically reflecting on what we might learn from the concepts the women
propose for themselves as meaningful ways to articulate their lives, when we listen
intently.

MEDIA PRACTICE AND EDUCATION

69

Methodology
Why digital storytelling?
Digital storytelling refers to ‘a creative arts process that is used to capture personal stories,
using images and sound in a three to five minute digital clip’ (Lambert 2010 in De Vecchi
et al. 2016, 1). Participatory processes using digital media are increasingly used in social
research ‘with the recognition that process can be as important as product’ (Gifford and
Wilding 2013, 562). Indeed, digital storytelling as a methodology allows participants to experience a greater sense of agency as co-constructors of knowledge, by narrating and recording
their stories according to what they feel is important (Lenette 2017; Alexandra 2008; Johnson
and Kendrick 2016). As such, it has been described as a ‘cathartic’ process (Lenette, Brough,
and Cox 2013). In migration studies specifically, Alexandra (2008, 103) argues that:
A dialectic approach to storytelling that engages processes of remembering, meaning making
and the re-constituting of lived experiences through the creation of a digital story is purposefully different than the testimonial performances that frequently populate the public policy,
academic and NGO sectors. It constitutes an essential aspect of a multi-fold epistemological
frame that not only responds to the complex phenomena of migration, but to the urgency
for narrative.

Recently, there has been growing interest among researchers, policy-makers, and practitioners in using methods that encourage genuine engagement and foster agency in
decision-making (Lenette, Brough, and Cox 2013; Israel et al. 1998; Mitchell, Milne and
de Lange 2012). Digital storytelling has emerged as one such approach to gain more
nuanced understandings of well-being concepts in research with ‘marginalised’ populations including refugees (Alexandra 2008; Lenette, Cox and Brough 2015; Gifford and
Wilding 2013) and in mental health research with vulnerable groups more broadly (Parr
2007). Digital storytelling has been shown to be particularly suited in collaborations
with people from refugee backgrounds and to articulate emotionally challenging
aspects of lived experiences, as it ‘open[s] up powerful possibilities for expressing their
knowledge and identities’ (Johnson and Kendrick 2016, 1). In fact, Alexandra (2008, 101)
pointed out the value of digital storytelling in relation to forced migration scholarship
as a platform whereby ‘[i]ndividually selecting a story and collaboratively producing the
audio-visual expression of that tale presents new possibilities concerning the politics
and ethics of storytelling’.

Participants
All participants entered Australia through the Woman at Risk program. This visa category
was introduced in Australia in 1989 to address the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees’ concerns about the particularly precarious and vulnerable situation of refugee
women and children across the globe. This visa is for women from refugee backgrounds
who do not have the protection of a male relative and are in danger of victimisation, harassment, or serious abuse because of their gender. Australia is one of a few resettlement
countries offering a Woman at Risk program (Department of Immigration and Border Protection [DIBP] 2016). In 2014–2015, 1009 women from Afghanistan, Burma, Democratic
Republic of Congo, Eritrea, and Ethiopia were granted Woman at Risk visas. Further
details are provided in the narratives below.

70

C. LENETTE ET AL.

Digital storytelling project
Over six months in 2015, four women were engaged in this digital storytelling project and
produced three stories (one being a combined mother–daughter narrative). A dedicated
and experienced storyteller/facilitator worked closely with this small group of participants
(part of the larger study on refugee women ‘at-risk’ in Brisbane) to produce the digital
stories, using a semi-structured approach. Two interpreters (also from refugee backgrounds) were engaged to ensure participants whose English language skills were
limited (due to recency of arrival as inclusion criterion) could provide informed consent
and actively engage in all the phases of the digital storytelling project. Ethical clearance
was granted by [Queensland University of Technology] in 2014 for the broader project.
The four phases were:
(1) Pre-workshop phase: In-depth interviews (at least two with each participant) were held
at the women’s homes to discuss ideas leading up to the story creation process. It
involved the establishment of a relationship of trust between the facilitator and
each participant;
(2) A digital storytelling workshop at [Queensland University of Technology] on narratives
(only two participants and one interpreter could attend): Participants were asked to
bring an item of a particular meaning or sentimental value to them to share stories
with the group. The workshop focused on life narratives, the importance of values
and storytelling, and links between the women’s items and memories. A research
assistant and Author 1 also participated in the workshop while taking notes;
(3) Collaborative development of script: The facilitator spent several hours working with
each woman on storylines during which a deeper relationship was built, based on trust
that the process was oriented to their needs and would result in tangible stories of
value for participants. Each participant experienced agency by setting her own
agenda and crafting her narrative the way she wanted, with the facilitator’s support.
Audio recording ensued, and the facilitator’s prior experiences with digital storytelling
meant that she made useful suggestions like rewriting scripts in shorter phrases to
assist narrators when they read out loud for recording. To select images for inclusion
in the digital stories, participants provided some photographs, while others were
taken during the project; the facilitator also added stock images (of refugee camps,
political leaders, maps etc.);
(4) Finalisation of digital stories and viewing with each participant: This included brief
post-viewing interviews conducted by the facilitator.
Importantly, relationships of trust between the facilitator and each participant were essential to the success of the digital storytelling project, which is why the group was kept small.

Analysis
In many forms of qualitative analysis, some kind of thematic inquiry drives a search for
commonalities and points of difference among ‘the stories’ participants tell; qualitative
data are broken down and then reconstituted. While qualitative research may be regularly
in tension with quantitative approaches, it retains a broad common reference point of
rationality produced through systematic – and at times de-contextualised – analysis.

MEDIA PRACTICE AND EDUCATION

71

Lost though in this form of analysis is the unified coherence of the original story told by the
original storyteller. While this approach may still yield insightful outcomes, ‘the possibility
of opening up a narrative to reveal multiple truths and more evocative, revelatory pathways for dialogue and understanding is often shut down’ (Alexandra 2008, 101). In this
study, refugee women were asked to create a story about their lives rather than answer
questions in an interview process (undoubtedly the most common form of qualitative
inquiry). Our guiding question in the analysis phase was, What can we learn when we
listen rather than ask questions and receive answers? We adopted this stance because we
questioned the ‘ways in which other people’s stories are subtracted, translated and
defined’ in an attempt to ‘simplify’ participants’ experiences and assign meaning to contributions for the purposes of reporting key research findings (Alexandra 2008, 101). Rather
than engaging in a relatively reductive dissection of the stories, we were keen to keep the
narrative arc of each story outlined below.

Participant narratives
Threads of life – Najiba (pseudonym), Afghanistan
Najiba’s digital story opens with an image of a deep red and patterned woven carpet (we
later learn this is called a Gillim) followed by two expansive mountainous landscapes in
Afghanistan and then a photograph of Najiba as a young woman (Figure 1).
In these early moments of the story, the words we first hear come from an interpreter
who reads Najiba’s story in English. The interpreter introduces herself, then Najiba, and
tells us ‘this is the story of Najiba which she asked me to tell on her behalf’. Then we

Figure 1. ‘Since I remember myself I liked to spend time with my family. I liked to sit with my mother
and weave carpets. We call them Gillims. As we combined coloured threads and weaved them together,
we sang, told stories and laughed. It was a happy time’ (Threads of Life 2015).

72

C. LENETTE ET AL.

hear Najiba’s voice as she is heard singing a cappella and the early images of the digital
story are scrolled through. Despite limited English language skills, Najiba asserts her presence in the digital story in a way she could not do for example in an interview, and certainly not in any process where she is confined to the role of a subject of research. Her
singing, along with her choices in terms of photographs and the details she chooses to
share give Najiba agency in her own storytelling. In this scenario, she is not answering
questions, nor is she having a conversation; rather, she is telling her ‘preferred story’
which she has crafted herself albeit with the support of others.
Najiba’s digital story contains some important elements of her refugee journey, but
many details remain unknown. We learn that Najiba spent part of her childhood and
adult years in Iran following her escape with her family from Taliban persecution in Afghanistan. We do not learn the specific circumstances that led Najiba and her family to leave
or precisely what led to her departure from Iran and arrival in Australia. While these details
may be key to being granted protection as a refugee, Najiba is more than her refugee
status and has more to tell us than the expected ‘refugee story’. Najiba utilises the
opening image of the red Gillim as a recurring image throughout her digital story and
in so doing tells her story in her own unique way.
As the story unfolds, we learn that Najiba is a weaver and an embroiderer, so when the
same red Gillim from the beginning of the story comes up during her recollections of Iran,
we become aware that this is her Gillim, her creation. We also hear of happier times; photographs of her sitting with her family on various Gillims now have a particular resonance.
She recalls times of sitting, weaving, singing, and laughing, and we learn that her
mother taught her weaving. Images of tea being served are always shown as taking
place on a Gillim (Figure 2).
At the age of 18, Najiba marries in Iran and is happy. She tells us that she and her husband
do everything together, ‘like a thread follows a needle’. The threads of her life come together
in a story of love. But her husband becomes ill from a debilitating disease. As she describes
her new responsibilities caring for him through illness, her grief is palpable as is her knowledge that the strength and texture of the ‘thread’ are changing. He loses his strength, his
sight – symbolised by a black screen – and ultimately his life. The thread has ‘snapped’
(and so the background music also stops abruptly). As Najiba speaks of these events, the
same red Gillim is shown again, but the colour is now removed, and Najiba tells us that
at the time, if her life was a Gillim, ‘it would be a black one’.
As we come across a photograph of the black amethyst ring which used to belong to
Najiba’s husband, and that she wears constantly since he died, we can see the significance
of the continuation of the relationship – his physical presence has been replaced by the
ring and so the thread is still present. It is a part of him that she carries with her everywhere. Nothing could make her part from the ring, as there is no replacement for what
it represents. Even during difficult times when she had to send her children to school
without food, she refused to sell her ring.
Najiba does not dwell on the darkness of those times. Instead, she tells us that she starts
to ‘thread’ again and that she teaches her daughter the craft. The same Gillim is shown and
significantly it is indeed now red. However, this is not a simplistic symbolism of rejuvenation as if inserted by an editor to ‘decorate’ the message. Instead, Najiba’s words now
directly address the Gillim. She tells us ‘the Gillim saved our life’. Her story then moves
to life in Australia, where she teaches the art of weaving to her daughter – but she still

MEDIA PRACTICE AND EDUCATION

73

Figure 2. ‘As to me, I can’t let go of the past. But I like when my new friends are visiting. We sit together
and talk, tell stories and even laugh’ (Threads of Life 2015).

feels too much grief to weave herself. She reflects on the significance of her threading as
carpets and embroidery now dominate the imagery of her digital story (Figure 3).
There are also more images of having tea with people sitting on Gillim, but now in Australia. Significantly, the photographs place the Gillim as the centre of the story. People are
present, though their faces or identities are not central to Najiba’s narrative – not because
they are unimportant but it is the Gillim itself that grounds the narrative. ‘I like it when my
new friends are visiting, we sit together and we talk, tell stories and sometimes even
laugh’. The phrase ‘we sit together’ now resonates more deeply. The Gillim, whether in
Afghanistan, Iran, or now in Australia, is the space in which ‘we sit together’. The Gillim
acts as a strong motif tying Najiba to her homeland, but it has also moved with Najiba,
tying her to those around her in meaningful ways. The Gillim is much more than a
quaint artefact of her cultural heritage. It is the constant in her story, providing a secure
base for Najiba to negotiate the many changes she has faced in the world around her,
as she ‘weaves’ her new identity (Figure 4).

74

C. LENETTE ET AL.

Figure 3. ‘My daughter and I turned to an old craft of weaving and embroidery. The Gillims saved our
lives. They were bright and beautiful but the colours of my heart were of the shades of dark amethyst’
(Threads of Life 2015).

Figure 4. ‘The thought of Gillims brings happiness. It gives me purpose and keeps my mind busy’
(Threads of Life 2015).

MEDIA PRACTICE AND EDUCATION

75

Najiba concludes the digital story with a question for herself. ‘And sometimes I think,
what if I start weaving again?’ Najiba then speaks of the value of keeping herself occupied
and of teaching her craft, particularly to her daughter, but it is her final words that ring out:
‘The threading I think will keep my story alive, my love alive’. In a context where everything
has changed, she sees weaving as a way of remaining connected to her love and her grief.
The final image is, of course, the same red Gillim, which opened the story. The story is
complete.

New life – Maha
Maha’s digital story begins with a close-up of a henna design, which sets the scene for the
central element of the story. We hear the voice of Ruha, who introduces herself as Maha’s
daughter, and then explains that she lends her voice to narrate her mother’s story. We
learn about the significance of her name and that it was her mother who chose the
name Ruha, as it means ‘Dreams’. And so the digital story is about Maha’s dreams that
she is realising in Australia (Figure 5).
The narrative shifts to first person, and we hear Maha’s voice as she sings a cappella. The
melody she hums extends an invitation for us to listen in and so Maha leads us into the
harmonies and dissonances of her narrative. Maha associates her old life in Sudan as
living in sorrow; she left the sadness behind, searching for a new life in Australia. She candidly explains the difficult times of confusion, loss, and frustration when she first arrived, to
the point where Maha wondered whether she had made a big mistake coming to Australia. As the story progresses, we notice the narrator’s hesitant pace and are reminded of the
difficulty of telling intimate stories in another language.

Figure 5. ‘I am Maha’ (New Life 2015).

76

C. LENETTE ET AL.

Maha describes in detail how everything looked strange and unfamiliar, and tells us
how she could neither drive nor get to the shops for groceries and medication – the
items that were essential for her family. The skills Maha may have had up to that point
did not help her in this new context, and the need to find her way around was particularly
daunting. In contrast, her children considered the new neighbourhood with excitement
and adapted to new surroundings by walking around town and discovering new sites.
The digital story includes several images of points of interest in the city, which would
have been all new to them when Maha and her children first arrived. But Maha looked
at things from a different perspective, perhaps due to her responsibilities as a sole
parent of four. She had to be pragmatic and worry about the welfare of her family. She
saw an opportunity through the digital storytelling process to share particularly poignant
examples of such difficulties.
We hear of the time when Maha had to sell her rings because her family went without
food for two days. We are left to imagine the deprivation that can arise because of lack of
resources or support networks. Maha did whatever she had to do to provide for her family,
and showed resourcefulness even though it meant parting with precious mementos from
her past life. ‘But I’m a fighter’ she says. She was determined to turn her situation around
for the sake of her children, and did not want to be considered as a helpless single refugee
woman. In the context of her narrative, Maha is not afraid to share stories of hardship and
confusion, but she wants us to remember her for her strength and determination.
We learn that a turning point in her life was when she attended English language
classes, where she could make new friends and be with others in similar situations.
Maha recalls how her teacher went above and beyond merely teaching language skills:
she also taught her life skills. She helped Maha and her family navigate different
systems in Australia and understand ‘how things work’; for example, she took her family
to Sunday markets and other events to ensure they saw new places and people. Maha’s
connection with neighbours over time was also critical, as they showed concern for her
family’s welfare. She says, ‘If they don’t see me or my kids for a day or two they will
come knocking at the door: “Are you okay?”’. So Maha and her family could not
imagine living anywhere else and feel connected to their new home and people in
their neighbourhood. This is in sharp contrast with Maha’s alienating feelings during
those first few weeks in Australia. She is able to see a future there and feels part of the
local community (Figure 6).
Maha explains that three things are important for her. First, she talks about how her
family is the centre of her life. Her children are like an anchor, and they motivated her
to adapt to this new place. They are the reason she persevered, and so she wants to
offer her children something better than what she experienced. Even though she has
just described how resourceful she was in very difficult circumstances, Maha says that
she does not want her children to be like her but wants them to be themselves, to be
true to who they are. Maha tells us, ‘I don’t want them to see what I saw. I want them
to sing their own songs’. We are reminded of the importance of singing to Maha as she
beautifully expresses her dreams for her children using a singing metaphor.
Then she moves on to describe the importance of henna. Because this is a rather unique
story, she is given the opportunity through the storytelling process to articulate why
henna has such significance in her life. She talks about henna as her field, her work, her
culture, and a practice that makes her happy. She also likes Arabic incenses and oils as

MEDIA PRACTICE AND EDUCATION

77

Figure 6. ‘If [my neighbours] don’t see me or my kids for a day or two they will come knocking at the
door: “Are you okay?” They will also invite us to have meals together or will explain where we can find
food on discounts’ (New Life 2015).

they remind her of who she is: ‘It connects me to my soul, my heritage’. Being a henna
artist is something that she is known for and proud of, and so we engage in aspects of
her life that are beyond her refugee experience. Henna is colourful, artistic, and a visible
point of connection with her culture. Rather than thinking of the difficulties at the beginning of her story, we are invited to focus on what she is very good at instead, and how she
uses her strengths and skills to bring joy to others and herself (Figure 7).
The third aspect she describes as important in her life involves helping newly arrived
families who have come to Australia as refugees like her to settle into their new lives.
Maha feels like it is her responsibility to help them walk along the paths she has travelled
herself (literally and figuratively): ‘I walk with them the roads I walked myself: to the
markets, the shops, and the pharmacies.’ She wants other people’s adaptation to this
new context to be easier than what she experienced, and she is committed to helping
in any way she can. Maha attributes this willingness to help others to her mother, who
always helped others, and so these are the values she wishes to pass on to her own children. She is more than a newly arrived refugee woman in Australia: Maha is someone who
is raising a family by herself, and who is committed to making others happy through her
henna work and by helping them (Figure 8).
We hear Maha sing again and then laugh as she concludes her story. Others around her
are heard laughing and clapping, and as viewers, the inclusion of this audio draws us into
the applause as a way of acknowledging what Maha has just shared in her digital story.
Despite the difficult episodes of her life, we are left with an impression that Maha feels
positive and hopeful about her future and particularly about her children’s future. The
story concludes with a photograph of Maha and Ruha, the central actor and the narrator
standing together in traditional dress and smiling at the camera, another indication that
Maha looks towards the future – the next generation – with a positive outlook.

78

C. LENETTE ET AL.

Figure 7. ‘I am happy when I see that other people enjoy my Henna. I also love to make Arabic incenses
and oils. I do it for free. It connects me to my soul, my heritage. Everyone knows me by Henna’ (New Life
2015).

Ubuntu: Togetherness – Egenie
In contrast with Najiba’s and Maha’s stories, Egenie’s digital narrative begins with a photograph of a group of children holding hands, and multiple voices are heard singing in
unison as the title appears first as ‘Ubuntu’ then in English as ‘Togetherness’ (Figure 9).

Figure 8. ‘I like making people happy – by Henna and by helping’ (New Life 2015).

MEDIA PRACTICE AND EDUCATION

79

Figure 9. ‘We have a word that is common to many African languages. It’s Ubuntu – Togetherness.
Xenophobia engulfed Ubuntu’ (Ubuntu: Togetherness 2015).

The shift is immediate as Egenie tells us of her childhood memories, which are linked to
stories of displacement and exile as a family, and moments of happiness despite such precariousness. The tone changes as we learn the focus of Egenie’s story; she gives human attributes to her experiences of xenophobia, depicted as someone who arrives in a place of
safety to disrupt: ‘It worked like poison. It ripped through people’s minds; it slowly destroyed
the relationships’. She speaks bluntly of the venomous nature of xenophobia and the weakened social fabric that it creates. Egenie then shifts back to Ubuntu; her explanation of the
word, common to several African languages, provides a sense of connection, of humanity, of
‘togetherness’. But this only provides momentarily reprieve from the more despicable
aspect of human interactions which she delves into next.
The language Egenie uses is evocative: ‘Xenophobia engulfed Ubuntu’, and we can
almost visualise a large, fierce animal that swallows or overshadows togetherness. The
sense of identity and safety that Egenie felt as a little girl has morphed into temporariness
and living in limbo, as we are told that her family was forced to live in a park in an urban
setting in South Africa. The photographs depicting Egenie with her loved ones smiling and
carefree, are replaced by pictures of Albert Park (Durban) and the sounds of police car
sirens. The pace conveys the abrupt shifts between moments of happiness and stories
of precariousness (Figure 10).
The park has been transformed into a makeshift camp. Egenie tells us: ‘It was an open
cage, a prison with no roof or walls to shield us. People who were sleeping alongside my
family in that park were not bound by Ubuntu.’ We can sense that the values she cherished
as a little girl are slipping away (she was 11 then) as her new reality sinks in. She now feels
like a trapped animal, a prisoner or criminal. There are no visible bars to this prison but the
barriers do exist. Everything around her has changed, and while she acknowledges that it

80

C. LENETTE ET AL.

Figure 10. ‘We found a temporary refuge in the public park in the middle of the city of Durban’
(Ubuntu: Togetherness 2015).

is precarious for all, she describes the suspicion and distrust among people despite their
common experience of exile (Figure 11).
Egenie then introduces us to her father – while the sound of sirens remains in the background, suggesting an imminent threat. At first, she refers to him as a mentor and friend,
which reveals closeness in their relationship and admiration for him. It emerges that he
was more than a father to her. Egenie shifts to poetic language when the story
becomes more difficult to tell and she uses analogies to describe her memories of the
night she lost her father. She recalls: ‘The night was silent until the enemy came knocking
… The chaos left separation and distortion’. We do not know who the enemy is, although
we can sense the shock of an unexpected disruption to a peaceful night, and we feel that
reality no longer makes sense to her. We see a series of images depicting injured men,
women, and children, of people being brutalised, as the sound of sirens persists. Egenie
is not concerned with providing details but she says, ‘no man could be spared’. That is
all she knows about her father’s disappearance.
We also do not know who helped her amid the chaos and confusion, but she refers to a
Good Samaritan, hinting at the importance of her Christian faith, as she recalls how strangers provided her with a haven after this terrible ordeal and the brutality her family experienced. What Egenie wants to tell us though is that she cannot make sense of the situation,
and her despair is palpable. It is not even possible for Egenie to grieve, as so many questions remain unanswered. But she eventually regains a sense of safety with the help of
strangers. Her loss and sense of emptiness, however, are immense as she shares, ‘I
never saw my dad again’.
Egenie then tells us how the passing of time allowed her to smile again, make new
plans, discover her dreams, and feel positive about the future. The camp that she now

MEDIA PRACTICE AND EDUCATION

81

Figure 11. ‘People who were sleeping alongside my family in that park were not bound by Ubuntu.
They were terrorised, lost, blindfolded and helpless’ (Ubuntu: Togetherness 2015).

calls ‘home’ provides an environment where she feels positive, meets new people, and
yearns to learn more. Leadership and education become part of her reality once she
joins a program for young people. She expresses pride in her contributions to the
group, where she becomes more confident and develops leadership skills.
Egenie’s contribution through the digital story goes beyond her life journey. In particular, she has strong views about poor leadership best understood from a sociopolitical perspective. She identifies how many African nations’ ‘leaders’ have very different notions of
leadership to the one she cherishes. As pictures of infamous dictators appear, she
describes them as selfish, proud, powerful, abusive, and arrogant; this is what she says
destroys Ubuntu, and leads to suffering, deaths, and displacement. She is clearly aware
of how such broader sociopolitical circumstances have affected her and her family,
causing displacement, separation, and exile, and more importantly, the loss of her
father. Instead, Egenie sees leadership as being about people and leading through
example. She positions herself as a confident young woman with a clear idea of who
she wants to be in the future. She understands her role as a leader in her own family,
where she provides support to her younger siblings and her mother.
Egenie takes us back to memories of her father as a mentor, as the one who taught her
about treating others with respect and kindness. She expresses love for her father and
fondly remembers him as someone who was happy and always laughing. She considers
him a leader. Lessons of humility, selflessness, and strong bonds as a family shaped her
own values about human relationships, in sharp contrast with the treatment her family
received during the xenophobic attacks. She shares photographs of herself with her
mother and father during happier times in Africa. She is seen smiling.

82

C. LENETTE ET AL.

Figure 12. ‘That’s what my Dad taught me. He was the best Dad in the world. Happiness and laughter
followed him around. He truly cared about people’ (Ubuntu: Togetherness 2015).

Her digital story concludes with her affirmation, ‘Now I know that is the real Ubuntu’.
She has skilfully tied together her own understanding of Ubuntu with notions of leadership
and the memory of her father. The voices of children singing in unison are heard again,
accompanied by a dedication to her father on the same image that opened her digital
story (Figure 12).

Discussion
Each story is unique as a ‘whole’ and thus is presented in that way. Yet, we wish to highlight opportunities for learning from considering the three stories as constituting a new
‘whole’, both in relation to the content and the form. Since in this particular instance participants drove the narratives (as opposed to more typical question–answer dialogues of
qualitative interviewing), the digital stories each reflect the woman’s agency in both the
content and process. The stories exemplify a concern for the ‘told’ (content) and the
‘telling’ (form) (Josselson 2011). The commonality of ‘told’ across the stories is that they
all convey backstories of forced migration and are recognisably ‘refugee’ stories with
accounts of lives disrupted. The nature of the human rights violations associated with
these disruptions is conveyed with varying degrees of detail: Egenie gives the most
detail of her experiences of persecution. Using photographs, sound, music, and words,
her story gives voice to a series of traumatic events. Maha and Najiba certainly make us
aware of difficult pasts but the two women choose to provide less detail. Certainly, we
learn something from all three women about their trajectories. Part of the narrative
process is to create a story across past, present, and future ‘threads’ to yield a strong
and cohesive ‘whole’ or ‘preferred’ narrative, and this is tangible in all three stories.

MEDIA PRACTICE AND EDUCATION

83

Perhaps what is more interesting is what Maha, Najiba, and Egenie choose to emphasise to us, the audience, as the ‘key meaning’ of their respective stories. There are not only
key elements of plot and, in this case, an emphasis on ‘crisis’ or ‘turning point’, but there is
also an element of evaluation where each storyteller leans back from the plot and reflects
on the meaning of their stories (Riessman 2008). It is striking that all three narratives bring
together meanings of social connection, identity, purpose, and hope. Maha finds purpose
and connection in helping others, and henna connects her past and present, and connects
her to others: ‘Everyone knows me by Henna’. Najiba speaks of weaving in a similar vein:
her identity, purpose and social connections, past, and present, are woven together along
with her carpets. Finally, Egenie’s message about Ubuntu again references identity,
purpose, social connectedness, past, and present. In contrast with the more common presentation of ‘trauma stories’ which are all too familiar in refugee studies, we learn about the
unique ways in which these three women make sense of disrupted lives, using their own
frames of reference and their own voice in the digital stories. These are their ‘preferred’
stories in narrative terms, which highlight the usefulness of the methodology with marginalised participants.
Henna, weaving, and Ubuntu may seem an unlikely trio of concepts to inform refugee
studies, but in another sense, they represent the value of listening to and inquiring about
whole stories, rather than just ‘slices’ of experiences or answers to questions. In this regard,
it is not just the ‘told’ at work here but also the ‘telling’; together, they yield a more profound means of expression (Johnson and Kendrick 2016). As such, henna, weaving, and
Ubuntu all very powerfully articulate an insider epistemology in the process of ‘meaning
making’ that challenges us to think differently about refugee experiences. For Najiba,
‘Gillim saved our life’. For Maha, henna ‘connects me to my soul, my heritage’. Finally,
Egenie knows ‘that is the real Ubuntu’. These are all powerful statements of resolution,
healing, identity, social connection, and hopefulness.
There is another layer to the narratives presented here which needs acknowledgement. As digital stories, the medium includes photographs and sound. The use of
‘the visual’ in social research has a long history. We differentiate though between
images as simply ‘illustrations’ of text versus the images themselves as texts to also
be ‘read’ (Riessman 2008, 142). In a digital story, images support the narration; in all
three stories, the women selected images that helped them articulate their story to
act as ‘triggers’ for storytelling. Johnson and Kendrick (2016, 2) describe this process
as one where ‘the nonlinguistic is called into the service of the linguistic as supplementary resources’. The centrality of the images then cannot be discounted. Furthermore,
the significance of voice as sound rather than written words should also be acknowledged. Words are spoken (usually by the protagonist or a trusted narrator) in a
digital narrative; thus, emotion, significance, and meaning are produced in the sound
of the words and not just the words themselves. The inclusion of participants’ voice
as audio (even when mediated through interpreters), as well as music and singing,
invites the viewer-listener to hear the women’s stories. The ‘audio’ and ‘visual’ aspects
add a particular richness to the narratives, highlighting added benefits of using
digital storytelling in research with refugee women.
Another point is that engaging in digital storytelling – or perhaps, digital story
making – contributes to the women being present in the research in ways that interviews and questionnaires cannot fully capture. The methodology represents a

84

C. LENETTE ET AL.

meaningful approach that made sense to the women involved. Johnson and Kendrick
(2016, 6) also found that their digital storytelling project with refugee school children
‘opened up distinct possibilities to make visible the more intangible aspects of [ … ]
identity and past experiences’. We highlight here, the sense of agency afforded
through the process of creating stories (as in Alexandra 2008), in sharp contrast with
some of the ‘disempowering’ content of the stories. As such, the nuanced stories that
women craft can be frequently excluded from broader discourses surrounding
refugee issues, which can be overly simplified into ‘good’ or ‘bad’ narratives. The
digital storytelling project offered a meaningful opportunity to bring relatively disjointed
personal narratives of becoming a refugee and adapting in Australia into a more coherent ‘whole’ that values the multiple challenges and positive elements inherent to participants’ lived experiences. This could only be achieved effectively by relinquishing
the researcher role of ‘question asker’ to enter a space alongside participants, who
could then exercise agency to create their own stories and define key issues, processes,
and outcomes. Using this audio-visual narrative approach in collaborative
research, different events in participants’ lives are ‘given cohesion, meaning and direction’ (Sandelowski 1991, 163). The digital storytelling project created a meaningful
opportunity to process, and make meaning of the plethora of changes in participants’
lives in terms of identity, social fabric, and culture, as well as define a way forward.

Conclusion
The value of storytelling to participants and to the collective ‘us’ as the audience for the
women’s stories highlights the broader potential for narrative methods such as digital
storytelling to be used in more meaningful ways in mental health research in particular.
None of the participants used mainstream mental health categories that dominate the
refugee literature, refuting claims of ‘singularity’ in refugee narratives. Instead, our analysis
suggests that digital storytelling offered an appropriate vehicle for ‘whole’ and unique
stories to emerge to inform us of the key concepts that matter to participants. As such,
the women emerged not just as storytellers but are also recognised as active co-constructors of new knowledge through this process.
In the spirit of narrative inquiry, we conclude with further reference to Najiba’s story,
and specifically the clear shifts the facilitator witnessed during Najiba’s engagement. At
the start of the digital storytelling project, Najiba was struggling with complex mental
health issues and was under medication; she was not sure about the value of participating
in this part of the larger project. A widow with four children, Najiba was confined indoors
and felt unmotivated. She held little hope for the future, and so had few expectations of
the possible benefit of participating in this activity. However, upon completion of her
digital story, Najiba described the experience as ‘better than the pills’ she took (which
she thought had little effect on her). She found the opportunity to tell her story in her
own way to be enjoyable. She felt more motivated to leave her home and was considering
attending English language classes at her local technical college. She began contemplating the possibilities her new life had to offer, realising that medication was not her only
way out of this inertia. Digital storytelling offered Najiba the opportunity to reflect on
her life and consider her future.

MEDIA PRACTICE AND EDUCATION

85

Acknowledgements
Sincere thanks to the women who participated in this research for their generosity in sharing their
stories, and to Louise Farrell and Elena Volkova for their involvement in the project.

Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.

Funding
This work was supported by the Australian Research Council [grant number LP140100609].

Notes on contributors
Caroline Lenette is a Senior Lecturer in the School of Social Sciences and a founding member of the
Forced Migration Research Network at The University of New South Wales, Sydney. She collaborates
with resettled refugee women using visual ethnographic methods to convey their experiences of
mental health and well-being.
Mark Brough is a social anthropologist specialising in public health research at the Queensland
University of Technology. His work is predominantly concerned with addressing the health
inequalities faced by people from refugee backgrounds and Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people.
Robert Schweitzer is Professor of Psychology at the Queensland University of Technology. His
research centres upon refugee well-being, psychotherapy process and outcome, and the application
of phenomenology in psychological research.
Ignacio Correa-Velez is an Associate Professor at the Faculty of Health, Queensland University of
Technology. His research interests include refugee health, settlement and integration, and mental
health.
Kate Murray is a Senior Lecturer at the Queensland University of Technology. Her research interests
include refugee and immigrant health, acculturation, and the cultural adaptation of evidence-based
interventions for diverse populations.
Lyn Vromans is a Psychologist and Research Fellow in the School of Psychology and Counselling at
the Queensland University of Technology. Her research interests include cross-cultural and refugee
loss and mental health and narrative interventions.

ORCID
Caroline Lenette
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-2317-0438
Robert D. Schweitzer
http://orcid.org/0000-0001-9915-0786
Kate Murray
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-9935-8170
Lyn Vromans
http://orcid.org/0000-0003-3847-7018

References
Alexandra, D. 2008. “Digital Storytelling as Transformative Practice: Critical Analysis and Creative
Expression in the Representation of Migration in Ireland.” Journal of Media Practice 9 (2): 101–112.
Clandinin, D. J. 2013. Engaging in Narrative Inquiry. Walnut Creek, CA: Left Coast Press.
De Haene, L., H. Grietens, and K. Verschueren. 2010. “Holding Harm: Narrative Methods in Mental
Health Research on Refugee Trauma.” Qualitative Health Research 20 (12): 1664–1675. doi:10.
1177/1049732310376521.

86

C. LENETTE ET AL.

De Vecchi, N., A. Kenny, V. Dickson-Swift, and S. Kidd. 2016. “How Digital Storytelling Is Used in Mental
Health: A Scoping Review.” International Journal of Mental Health Nursing 25 (3): 183–193.
DIBP (Department of Immigration and Border Protection). 2016. Australia’s Humanitarian Programme
2016–17. Discussion paper. Accessed March 23, 2016. http://www.border.gov.au/
ReportsandPublications/Documents/discussion-papers/discussion-paper-humanitarianprogramme_2016-17.pdf.
Ellis, B. H., M. Kia-Keating, S. A. Yusuf, A. Lincoln, and A. Nur. 2007. “Ethical Research in Refugee
Communities and the Use of Community Participatory Methods.” Transcultural Psychiatry 44 (3):
459–481.
Gifford, S. M., and R. Wilding. 2013. “Digital Escapes? ICTs, Settlement and Belonging Among Karen
Youth in Melbourne, Australia.” Journal of Refugee Studies 26 (4): 558–575. doi:10.1093/jrs/fet020.
Israel, B. A., A. J. Schulz, E. A. Parker, and A. B. Becker. 1998. “Review of Community-Based Research:
Assessing Partnership Approaches to Improve Public Health.” Annual Review of Public Health 19 (1):
173–202.
Johnson, L., and M. Kendrick. 2016. ““Impossible Is Nothing”: Expressing Difficult Knowledge through
Digital Storytelling.” Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy 60 (6): 667–675.
Josselson, R. 2011. “Narrative Research: Constructing, Deconstructing, and Reconstructing Story.” In
Five Ways of Doing Qualitative Analysis, edited by F. J. Wertz, K. Charmaz, L. M. McMullen, R.
Josselson, R. Anderson, and E. McSpadden, 224–242. New York: Guilford Press.
Lenette, C. 2017. Using Digital Story Telling in Participatory Research with Refugee Women. Research
Methods Cases (SAGE online). https://www.instituteforcreativehealth.org.au/sites/default/files/
sage_digital-storytelling-participatory-research-refugee-women-2.pdf
Lenette, C., M. Brough, and L. Cox. 2013. “Everyday Resilience: Narratives of Single Refugee Women
with Children.” Qualitative Social Work 12 (5): 637–653.
Lenette, C., L. Cox, and M. Bourgh. 2015. “Digital Storytelling as a Social Work Tool: Learning from
Ethnographic Research with Women from Refugee Backgrounds.” British Journal of Social Work
45 (3): 988–1005.
Mitchell, C., E.-J. Milne, and N. de Lange. 2012. “Introduction.” In Handbook of Participatory Video,
edited by E.-J. Milne, C. Mitchell, and N. de Lange, 1–11. Maryland: AltaMira Press.
Parr, H. 2007. “Collaborative Film-Making as Process, Method and Text in Mental Health Research.”
Cultural Geographies 14 (1): 114–138.
Polkinghorne, D. 1995. “Narrative Configuration in Qualitative Analysis.” International Journal of
Qualitative Studies in Education 8 (1): 5–23.
Riessman, C. 2008. Narrative Methods for the Human Sciences. London: Sage Publications.
Sandelowski, M. 1991. “Telling Stories: Narrative Approaches in Qualitative Research.” Image: Journal
of Nursing Scholarship 23 (3): 161–166.

Copyright of Media Practice & Education is the property of Taylor & Francis Ltd and its
content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the
copyright holder's express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email
articles for individual use.

