Communicative and Cultural Memory
JAN ASSMANN

Copyright 2008. De Gruyter.
All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.

1. Memory: Individual, Social, and Cultural
Memory is the faculty that enables us to form an awareness of selfhood
(identity), both on the personal and on the collective level. Identity, in its
turn, is related to time. A human self is a “diachronic identity,” built “of
the stuff of time” (Luckmann). This synthesis of time and identity is effectuated by memory. For time, identity, and memory we may distinguish
among three levels:
Level

Time

Identity

Memory

inner (neuromental)

inner,
subjective
time
social time

inner self

individual
memory

social self,
person as
carrier of
social roles
cultural
identity

communicative
memory

social

cultural

historical,
mythical,
cultural time

cultural
memory

Figure 1

On the inner level, memory is a matter of our neuro-mental system. This is
our personal memory, the only form of memory that had been recognized
as such until the 1920s. On the social level, memory is a matter of communication and social interaction. It was the great achievement of the French
sociologist Maurice Halbwachs to show that our memory depends, like
consciousness in general, on socialization and communication, and that
memory can be analyzed as a function of our social life (Les cadres sociaux;
La mémoire collective). Memory enables us to live in groups and
communities, and living in groups and communities enables us to build a
memory. During these same years, psychoanalysts such as Sigmund Freud
and Carl Gustav Jung were developing theories of collective memory but
still adhered to the first, the inner and personal level, looking for collective
memory not in the dynamics of social life but in the unconscious depths
of the human psyche (see also Straub, this volume).

EBSCO Publishing : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 2/5/2020 2:34 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES
AN: 247499 ; Young, Sara B., Nnning, Ansgar, Erll, Astrid.; Cultural Memory Studies : An International and Interdisciplinary Handbook
Account: undeloan.main.ehost

110

Jan Assmann

Aby Warburg, however, the art historian, coined the term “social
memory” with regard to the third, the cultural level; he seems to have been
the first one who treated images, that is, cultural objectivations, as carriers
of memory. His main project was to study the “afterlife” (Nachleben) of
classical antiquity in Western culture and he termed this project “Mnemosyne,” the ancient Greek term for memory and the mother of the nine
Muses. As an art historian, Warburg specialized in what he called
Bildgedächtnis (iconic memory), but the general approach to reception history as a form of (cultural) memory could be applied to every other domain of symbolic forms as well (Gombrich). This is what Thomas Mann
endeavored to do in his four Joseph novels, which appeared between 1933
and 1943 and which may rank as the most advanced attempt to reconstruct a specific cultural memory—in this case of people living in Palestine
and Egypt in the Late Bronze Age—and, at the same time, to conjure up
our European cultural memory and its Jewish foundations in times of
anti-Semitism (J. Assmann, Thomas Mann). Neither Warburg nor Thomas
Mann, however, used the term “cultural memory”; this concept has been
explicitly developed only during the last twenty years. It is, therefore, only
since then that the connection between time, identity, and memory in their
three dimensions of the personal, the social, and the cultural has become
more and more evident.
The term “communicative memory” was introduced in order to delineate the difference between Halbwachs’s concept of “collective memory” and our understanding of “cultural memory” (A. Assmann). Cultural
memory is a form of collective memory, in the sense that it is shared by a
number of people and that it conveys to these people a collective, that is,
cultural, identity. Halbwachs, however, the inventor of the term “collective memory,” was careful to keep his concept of collective memory apart
from the realm of traditions, transmissions, and transferences which we
propose to subsume under the term “cultural memory.” We preserve
Halbwachs’s distinction by breaking up his concept of collective memory
into “communicative” and “cultural memory,” but we insist on including
the cultural sphere, which he excluded, in the study of memory. We are,
therefore, not arguing for replacing his idea of “collective memory” with
“cultural memory”; rather, we distinguish between both forms as two
different modi memorandi, ways of remembering.

2. Culture as Memory
Cultural memory is a kind of institution. It is exteriorized, objectified, and
stored away in symbolic forms that, unlike the sounds of words or the

EBSCOhost - printed on 2/5/2020 2:34 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Communicative and Cultural Memory

111

sight of gestures, are stable and situation-transcendent: They may be transferred from one situation to another and transmitted from one generation
to another. External objects as carriers of memory play a role already on
the level of personal memory. Our memory, which we possess as beings
equipped with a human mind, exists only in constant interaction not only
with other human memories but also with “things,” outward symbols.
With respect to things such as Marcel Proust’s famous madeleine, or artifacts, objects, anniversaries, feasts, icons, symbols, or landscapes, the term
“memory” is not a metaphor but a metonym based on material contact between a remembering mind and a reminding object. Things do not “have”
a memory of their own, but they may remind us, may trigger our memory,
because they carry memories which we have invested into them, things
such as dishes, feasts, rites, images, stories and other texts, landscapes, and
other “lieux de mémoire.” On the social level, with respect to groups and
societies, the role of external symbols becomes even more important,
because groups which, of course, do not “have” a memory tend to
“make” themselves one by means of things meant as reminders such as
monuments, museums, libraries, archives, and other mnemonic institutions. This is what we call cultural memory (A. Assmann). In order to be
able to be reembodied in the sequence of generations, cultural memory,
unlike communicative memory, exists also in disembodied form and requires institutions of preservation and reembodiment.
This institutional character does not apply to what Halbwachs called
collective memory and what we propose to rename communicative memory. Communicative memory is non-institutional; it is not supported by
any institutions of learning, transmission, and interpretation; it is not cultivated by specialists and is not summoned or celebrated on special occasions; it is not formalized and stabilized by any forms of material symbolization; it lives in everyday interaction and communication and, for this
very reason, has only a limited time depth which normally reaches no
farther back than eighty years, the time span of three interacting generations. Still, there are frames, “communicative genres,” traditions of communication and thematization and, above all, the affective ties that bind
together families, groups, and generations.
A change of frames brings about forgetting; the durability of memories depends on the durability of social bonds and frames. In his earlier
work, Halbwachs does not seem to be concerned with the social interests
and power structures that are active in shaping and framing individual
memories. In his last work on collective memory, however, he shows a
keen awareness of institution and power. La topographie légendaire des évangiles
en terre sainte, published in 1941 during the German occupation, deals with
the transformation of Palestine into a site of Christian memory by the

EBSCOhost - printed on 2/5/2020 2:34 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

112

Jan Assmann

installment of all kinds of memorials, a process which took place after the
adoption of Christianity as the state religion by the Roman empire. In this
work, he crosses the border which he himself had erected between mémoire
and tradition and shows to what degree this kind of official memory is
dependent on theological dogma and formed by the power structure of
the church.

3. Time Frames
Jan Vansina, an anthropologist who worked with oral societies in Africa,
devoted an important study to the form in which they represent the past
and observed a tripartite structure. The recent past, which looms large in
interactive communication, recedes, as time goes by, more and more into
the background. Information becomes scarcer and vaguer the further back
one moves into the past. According to Vansina, this knowledge of affairs
that are told and discussed in everyday communication has a limited depth
in time, reaching not beyond three generations. Concerning a more remote past, there is either a total lack of information or one or two names
are produced with great hesitation. For the most remote past, however,
there is again a profusion of information dealing with traditions about the
origin of the world and the early history of the tribe. This information,
however, is not committed to everyday communication but intensely formalized and institutionalized. It exists in the forms of narratives, songs,
dances, rituals, masks, and symbols; specialists such as narrators, bards,
mask-carvers, and others are organized in guilds and have to undergo long
periods of initiation, instruction, and examination. Moreover, it requires
for its actualization certain occasions when the community comes together for a celebration. This is what we propose calling “cultural memory.” In oral societies, as Vansina has shown, there is a gap between the
informal generational memory referring to the recent past and the formal
cultural memory which refers to the remote past, the origin of the world,
and the history of the tribe, and since this gap shifts with the succession
of generations, Vansina calls it the “floating gap.” Historical consciousness, Vansina resumes, operates in oral societies on only two levels: the
time of origins and the recent past.
Vansina’s “floating gap” illustrates the difference between social and
cultural frames of memory or communicative and cultural memory. The
communicative memory contains memories referring to Vansina’s “recent
past.” These are the memories that an individual shares with his contemporaries. This is what Halbwachs understood by “collective memory” and
what forms the object of oral history, that branch of historical research

EBSCOhost - printed on 2/5/2020 2:34 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Communicative and Cultural Memory

113

that bases itself not on the usual written sources of historiography, but
exclusively on memories gained in oral interviews. All studies in oral history confirm that even in literate societies living memory goes no further
back than eighty years after which, separated by the floating gap, come,
instead of myths of origin, the dates from schoolbooks and monuments.
The cultural memory is based on fixed points in the past. Even in the
cultural memory, the past is not preserved as such but is cast in symbols
as they are represented in oral myths or in writings, performed in feasts,
and as they are continually illuminating a changing present. In the context
of cultural memory, the distinction between myth and history vanishes.
Not the past as such, as it is investigated and reconstructed by archaeologists and historians, counts for the cultural memory, but only the past as it
is remembered. Here, in the context of cultural memory, it is the temporal
horizon of cultural memory which is important. Cultural memory reaches
back into the past only so far as the past can be reclaimed as “ours.” This
is why we refer to this form of historical consciousness as “memory” and
not just as knowledge about the past. Knowledge about the past acquires
the properties and functions of memory if it is related to a concept of
identity. While knowledge has no form and is endlessly progressive, memory involves forgetting. It is only by forgetting what lies outside the horizon of the relevant that it performs an identity function. Nietzsche (The
Use and Abuse of History) circumscribed this function by notions such as
“plastic power” and “horizon,” obviously intending the same thing for
which now the term “identity” has become generally accepted.
Whereas knowledge has a universalist perspective, a tendency towards
generalization and standardization, memory, even cultural memory, is
local, egocentric, and specific to a group and its values.

4. Identity
The distinction of different forms of memory looks like a structure but it
works more as a dynamic, creating tension and transition between the
various poles. There is also much overlapping. This holds true especially
with respect to the relation between memory and identity. We must certainly avoid falling victim to what Amartya Sen has described as the
“identity illusion.” Individuals possess various identities according to the
various groups, communities, belief systems, political systems, etc. to
which they belong, and equally multifarious are their communicative and
cultural, in short: collective memories. On all levels, memory is an open
system. Still, it is not totally open and diffuse; there are always frames that
relate memory to specific horizons of time and identity on the individual,

EBSCOhost - printed on 2/5/2020 2:34 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

114

Jan Assmann

generational, political, and cultural levels. Where this relation is absent, we
are not dealing with memory but with knowledge. Memory is knowledge
with an identity-index, it is knowledge about oneself, that is, one’s own
diachronic identity, be it as an individual or as a member of a family, a
generation, a community, a nation, or a cultural and religious tradition.
Groups are formed and cohere by the dynamics of association and
dissociation which is always loaded (to varying degrees) with affection.
Halbwachs, therefore, spoke of “communautés affectives.” These “affective
ties” lend memories their special intensity. Remembering is a realization of
belonging, even a social obligation. One has to remember in order to belong: This is also one of the most important insights in Nietzsche’s Genealogy of Morality. Assimilation, the transition of one group into another one,
is usually accompanied by an imperative to forget the memories connected with the original identity. Inversely, this kind of assimilatory forgetting is precisely what is most feared and prohibited in the book of
Deuteronomy, which deals with such a change of frame between Egypt
and Canaan and the first and second generations of emigrants from
Egypt.

5. Institutions and Carriers
The difference between communicative and cultural memory expresses
itself also in the social dimension, in the structure of participation. The
participation of a group in communicative memory is diffuse. Some, it is
true, know more, some less, and the memories of the old reach farther
back than those of the young. However, there are no specialists of informal, communicative memory. The knowledge which is communicated in
everyday interaction has been acquired by the participants along with language and social competence. The participation of a group in cultural
memory, by contrast, is always highly differentiated. This applies even and
especially to oral and egalitarian societies. The preservation of the cultural
memory of the group was originally the task of the poets. Even today, the
African griots fulfill this function of guardians of cultural memory.
The cultural memory always has its specialists, both in oral and in literate societies. These include shamans, bards, and griots, as well as priests,
teachers, artists, clerks, scholars, mandarins, rabbis, mullahs, and other
names for specialized carriers of memory. In oral societies, the degree of
specialization of these carriers depends on the magnitude of the demands
that are made of their memory. Those demands that insist on verbatim
transmission are ranked highest. Here, human memory is used as a “database” in a sense approaching the use of writing: A fixed text is verbally

EBSCOhost - printed on 2/5/2020 2:34 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Communicative and Cultural Memory

115

“written” into the highly specialized and trained memory of these specialists. This is typically the case when ritual knowledge is at stake and where
a ritual must strictly follow a “script,” even if this script is not laid down in
writing. The Rgveda constitutes the most prominent example of a codification of ritual memory based solely on oral tradition. The magnitude of
this task corresponds to the social rank of the ritual specialists, the Brahmin, who form the highest caste, higher even than the aristocratic class of
warriors (Kshatriya) to which the rulers belong. In traditional Rwanda, the
scripts for the eighteen royal rituals had to be memorized by specialists
who ranked as the highest notables of the kingdom. Error could be punished by death. Those three notables who knew by heart the full text of all
eighteen rituals even partook of the divinity of the ruler (Borgeaud).
In the context of rituals, therefore, we observe the rise of the oldest
systems of memorization or mnemotechniques, with or without the help
of systems of notation like knotted chords, tchuringas, and other forms of
pre-writing. With the invention of full-fledged systems of writing, it is
interesting to see how differently various religions have behaved vis à vis
this new cultural technique. In the Indo-European traditions, from the
Indian Brahmins to the Celtic Druids, we observe a general distrust and
shunning of writing. Memory is held to be by far the more trustworthy
medium to hand down the religious (that is, ritual) knowledge to later
generations. The reason normally given is that too many mistakes may
creep into a text by copying. The true reason, however, seems to be that
writing always implies the danger of dissemination, of giving away a secret
tradition to the profane and uninitiated. This distrust in writing is still very
prominent in Plato. In the ancient Near Eastern societies such as Mesopotamia, Israel, and Egypt, on the other hand, writing is eagerly grasped as
an ideal medium for codifying and transmitting the sacred traditions, especially ritual scripts and recitations.
But even where the sacred tradition is committed to writing, memorization plays the central role. In ancient Egypt, a typical temple library
contained no more books than may be known by heart by the specialists.
Clement of Alexandria gives a vivid description of such a library. He
speaks of forty-two “indispensable” or “absolutely necessary” (pany
anankaiai) books that formed the stock of an Egyptian temple library and
were all written by Thot-Hermes himself. The priests were not supposed
to read and learn all of the books, but to specialize in certain genres corresponding to their rank and office. In describing a procession of these
priests, Clement shows both the hierarchy of the priesthood and the
structure of their library (Stromateis 6.4.35-37). The highest ranks are held
by the stolistes and the prophetes, corresponding in Egyptian terminology to
the “lector priest” and the “high priest.” It is the books of the stolist that

EBSCOhost - printed on 2/5/2020 2:34 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

116

Jan Assmann

serve as a codification of ritual memory proper, complemented by what
Clement calls “education.” The books of the high priest, on the other
hand, are said to contain normative or legal literature concerning the laws,
the gods, and priestly education. The library, thus, is divided into normative knowledge, which ranks highest; ritual knowledge, which comes a
close second; and general knowledge concerning astronomy, geography,
poetry, biography, and medicine, which occupies the lowest rank among
this canon of highly indispensable literature.
There is, however, still another sense in which the participation in
cultural memory may be structured in a society. This concerns the question of restricted knowledge, of secrecy and esotericism. Every traditional
society knows areas of restricted knowledge whose boundaries are not
simply defined by the different capacities of human memory and understanding, but also by questions of access and initiation. In Judaism, for
example, general participation is required in the Torah which every (male)
member of the group is supposed to know by heart. Specialized participation concerns the world of Talmudic and Medieval commentaries, codices,
and midrash, a vast body of literature that only specialists can master.
Secrecy, however, shrouds the esoteric world of kabbala, to which only
select adepts (and only after they have reached the age of forty) are admitted.
The participation structure of cultural memory has an inherent tendency
to elitism; it is never strictly egalitarian. Some are almost forced into
participation and have to prove their degree of admittance by formal exams
(as in traditional China); or by the mastery of linguistic registers (as in
England); or of the “Citatenschatz des deutschen Volkes” (treasury of German
quotations) as in nineteenth-century Germany. Others remain systematically
excluded from this “distinguished” knowledge, such as women in ancient
Greece, traditional China, and orthodox Judaism, or the lower classes in the
heyday of the German Bildungsbürgertum (educated bourgeoisie).
As to the media of cultural memory, a more or less pronounced tendency can be discerned towards a form of intra-cultural diglossia, corresponding to the distinction between one “great tradition” and several
“little traditions” as proposed by Robert Redfield. Until the creation of
modern Iwrith, the Jews had always lived in a situation of diglossia, since
their “Great Tradition” was written in Hebrew and for their everyday
communication they used vernacular languages such as Yiddish, Ladino,
or the various languages of their host countries. To a similar or lesser
degree, this situation is typical of virtually all traditional societies, be it in
the form of two different languages, such as Hindu and Sanskrit or Italian
and Latin, or two different linguistic varieties, such as Qur’anic and vernacular Arabic or classical and modern Chinese. Modern societies tend to

EBSCOhost - printed on 2/5/2020 2:34 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Communicative and Cultural Memory

117

diversify this binary structure by introducing more linguistic varieties according to the multiplication of cultural media such as film, broadcasting,
and television. The following list with its clear-cut binary structure, therefore, does not do full justice to the modern situation:

Content

Communicative
Memory
history in the frame of
autobiographical memory,
recent past

Forms

informal traditions and
genres of everyday
communication

Media

living, embodied memory,
communication in
vernacular language

Time
Structure

80-100 years, a moving
horizon of 3-4 interacting
generations
Participation diffuse
Structure

Cultural Memory
mythical history,
events in absolute
past (“in illo
tempore”)
high degree of
formation,
ceremonial
communication;
i l f in texts,
mediated
icons, dances, rituals,
and performances of
various kinds;
“classical” or otherwise formalized
language(s)
absolute past,
mythical primordial
time, “3000 years”
specialized carriers of
memory,
hierarchically
structured

Figure 2

Transitions and transformations account for the dynamics of cultural
memory. Two typical directions have a structural significance and should
at least briefly be mentioned in this context. One concerns the transition
from autobiographical and communicative memory into cultural memory,
and the other concerns, within cultural memory, the move from the rear
stage to the forefront, from the periphery into the center, from latency or
potentiality to manifestation or actualization and vice versa. These shifts
presuppose structural boundaries which are to be crossed: the boundary
between embodied and mediated forms of memory, and the boundary

EBSCOhost - printed on 2/5/2020 2:34 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

118

Jan Assmann

between what we propose calling “working” and “reference memories” or
“canon” and “archive” (see also A. Assmann, this volume).

References
Assmann, Aleida. “Memory, Individual and Collective.” The Oxford Handbook of Contextual Political Analysis. Eds. Robert E. Goodin und Charles
Tilly. Oxford: Oxford UP, 2006. 210-24.
Assmann, Jan. “Das kulturelle Gedächtnis.” Erwägen, Wissen, Ethik 13
(2002): 239-47.
––. Das kulturelle Gedächtnis: Schrift, Erinnerung und politische Identität in frühen
Hochkulturen. Beck: Munich, 1992.
––. Thomas Mann und Ägypten: Mythos und Monotheismus in den Josephsromanen.
Munich: Beck, 2006.
Borgeaud, Philippe. “Pour une approche anthropologique de la mémoire
religieuse.” La mémoire des religions. Eds. Jean-Claude Basset and Philippe Borgeaud. Geneva: Labor et Fides, 1988. 7-20.
Clemens von Alexandria. Stromateis. Trans. Otto Stählin. 3 vols. Munich:
Kösel & Pustet, 1936-38.
Gombrich, Ernst H. Aby Warburg: An Intellectual Biography. Chicago: U of
Chicago P, 1986.
Halbwachs, Maurice. Les cadres sociaux de la mémoire. 1925. Paris: Albin Michel, 1994.
––. On Collective Memory. 1925. Ed. and trans. Lewis A. Coser. Chicago: U
of Chicago P, 1992.
––. La mémoire collective. 1950. Paris: Albin Michel, 1997.
––. La topographie légendaire des évangiles en terre sainte. 1941. Paris: Presses
universitaires de France, 1971.
Luckmann, Thomas. “Remarks on Personal Identity: Inner, Social and
Historical Time.” Identity: Personal and Socio-Cultural. Ed. Anita Jacobson-Widding. Atlantic Highlands, NJ: Humanities, 1983. 67-91.
Nietzsche, Friedrich. On the Genealogy of Morality. Trans. Maudemarie Clark
and Alan J. Swensen. Indianapolis: Hackett, 1998.
––. The Use and Abuse of History. Trans. Adrian Collins. New York: Macmillan, 1957.
Redfield, Robert. Peasant Society and Culture: An Anthropological Approach to
Civilization. Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1956.
Sen, Amartya. Identity and Violence: The Illusion of Destiny. New York:
Norton, 2006.
Vansina, Jan. Oral Tradition as History. Madison: U of Wisconsin P, 1985.
Welzer, Harald. Das kommunikative Gedächtnis. Munich: Beck, 2002.

EBSCOhost - printed on 2/5/2020 2:34 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

