Remembrance of Things Imagined: Urban Development and the Fictions of Memory

Rural Fictions, Urban Realities: A Geography of Gilded Age American Literature. Mark Storey. Oxford UP, 2013.
The Folklore of the Freeway: Race and Revolt in the Modernist City. Eric Avila. U of Minnesota P, 2014.
Thomas Heise Author Notes
American Literary History, Volume 28, Issue 1, Spring 2016, Pages 210–222, https://doi-org.ezproxy.uniandes.edu.co:8443/10.1093/alh/ajv061
Published: 09 December 2015

Abstract
This article reflects on two recent contributions to the field of literary and cultural studies: Mark Storey's Rural Fictions, Urban Realities: A Geography of Gilded Age American Literature and Eric Avila's The Folklore of the Freeway: Race and Revolt in the Modernist City. These texts investigate how material transformations of natural and urban landscapes are mediated in nineteenth-century rural US literature and contemporary urban cultural practices. For many of the novelists in Storey's study, modernization and urban development are the condition not only for the disruption of older, residual modes of community, but also for the disruption of generic categories and styles of writing. For the literary and visual artists in Avila's monograph, the massive, postwar highway-building program that he considers produced diverse acts of historical recovery that were reflected across a range of artistic practices and strategies that rose in response. The article concludes by using Storey's and Avila's contributions to begin to think through how acts of historical recovery are actually historical fictions or retroactive invented traditions, which when they are monologic and filled with their own erasures of history succumb to nostalgia or urban pastoralism.

Issue Section: Articles
In his profoundly pessimistic meditation on unhappiness, Civilization and Its Discontents (1930), Freud contemplates an “astonishing” contention, the notion “that what we call our civilization is largely responsible for our misery, and that we should be much happier if we gave it up and returned to primitive conditions” (33). In this moment, Freud is astonished not by the classic polarity between the ugly realities of the modern urbanized society in which we live and the idyllic fantasy of a presocial state of being in nature to which we can never return. Rather, his thought pauses over the more complex, dialectical problem that no matter how “we may define civilization,” we constantly search for ways “to protect ourselves against the threats that emanate from the sources of suffering [that] are a part of that very civilization” (33). Thus, Freud presents us with the seemingly irresolvable and agonizing paradox that we turn to the extraordinary “scientific and technical advances” of modern life to safeguard us from the problems that modern life itself has created; in doing so, we produce new forms of disappointment, loss, and anxiety (35). “[T]he economics of our happiness,” he says in an evocative phrase, is intricately bound up with the affective dimension of technology—the feelings arising from a “newly-won power over space and time” and the “subjugation of the forces of nature”—modern advances that despite their liberating potential has left “the last few generations” at the end of a losing proposition in which they find no increase in the “amount of pleasurable satisfaction which they might expect from life” (34, 35).

The advances over space, time, and nature that Freud singles out at the end of the 1920s are tethered to the technologies of capitalist urbanization, namely the technologies of mobility and communication, whose power to radically transform our concepts of memory, community, and identity has only become more pronounced with time. “[T]he extension of human habitats, the dispersal of places across space, the opportunities to escape certain locales and to form new socialities, and the fragmentation of temporal flows,” these are, the sociologists Mimi Sheller and John Urry argue, only a few of the centrifugal effects of modernization, which combined with the temporal compression of geography have made individual, familial, and community life feel reduced and attenuated (207). As Freud contemplates the potential conveniences—flexibility and independence—afforded by a “newly-won power over space and time,” he asks why there is “no unequivocal increase in my feeling of happiness, if I can, as often as I please, hear the voice of a child of mine who is living hundreds of miles away or if I can learn in the shortest possible time after a friend has reached his destination that he has come through the long and difficult voyage unharmed?” (34, 35). Freud does not answer his own question but instead inverts the problem. “If there had been no railway to conquer distances,” he acknowledges, “my child would never have left town and I should need no telephone to hear his voice; if travelling across the ocean by ship had not been introduced, my friend would not have embarked on his sea-voyage and I should not need a cable to relieve my anxiety about him” (35). The train (or the plane or the automobile, or the ocean liner for that matter) can reunite the father with the child who it has taken away, but not without cost. A reunion is never the same as a union. At stake here in the expanded freedom of mobility and the unbundling of those territories of life—home, work, and leisure—that “have historically been closely integrated” is the weakening of the bonds of family, friendship, geography, and tradition (Sheller and Urry 208). Or as Andreas Huyssen reflects on the explosion of memory discourses in the age of globalization, it is the erosion of “a sense of stable boundaries and a place-bound culture with its regular flow of time and a core of permanent relations” (24). The technologies of space-time compression, Freud implies, have given rise to new, unsettling feelings of deterritorialization and the illnesses of distance, countervailing feelings known as Fernweh (literally, farsickness) and Heimweh (literally, homesickness), to say nothing of what elsewhere in his analysis he calls “real misery” (29).

Freud, of course, is writing from the city of Vienna in a mostly rural nation known even then for its disturbing fantasies of agrarian romanticism. The prelapsarian, organic social order whose “primitive conditions” we imagine that we might return to is an invented tradition that modernity both constitutes and forecloses—“a phantasmagoria of loss generated by modernity itself rather than by its prehistory,” writes Huyssen (24)—and which Freud rightly recognizes is historically unavailable, unknown to us outside of our own discursive inscriptions of it. “The future is a description without place,” Wallace Stevens once wrote, and perhaps the same might be said of the past (344). “[I]t is very difficult to form an opinion,” Freud concludes, “whether and to what degree men of an earlier age felt happier and what part their cultural conditions played in the matter” (36).

It is axiomatic that our articulations of identity, community, and memory are inseparable from our contingent experiences and personal and social understandings of geography, which—individually and socially—we narratively reconstruct under present “cultural conditions.” “[A]ll spaces contain stories and must be recognized as the site of an ongoing struggle over meaning and value,” the literary scholar Brian Jarvis contends (7). Two recently published studies, Mark Storey's Rural Fictions, Urban Realities: A Geography of Gilded Age American Literature and Eric Avila's The Folklore of the Freeway: Race and Revolt in the Modernist City, are important contributions to a now-substantial body of work on the intersection of critical human geography and culture that has amassed since Edward Soja noted a transdisciplinary “spatial turn” beginning in the late 1980s (16).1

[B]oth of these works of textualized spatiality unpack the geographical imagination of US culture through historically rich readings of literature and art that grapple with the affective fallouts of urbanization, with what happens when the terra firma becomes less firm and individuals and communities lose their footing.

In their different ways, both of these works of textualized spatiality unpack the geographical imagination of US culture through historically rich readings of literature and art that grapple with the affective fallouts of urbanization, with what happens when the terra firma becomes less firm and individuals and communities lose their footing. Since there can be, to quote Jarvis once more, “no geographical knowledge without historical narrative” (7), Storey's aim is to comb through a large body of late-nineteenth-century US literature by William Dean Howells, Sarah Orne Jewett, Hamlin Garland, Stephen Crane, Alice Brown, and Mark Twain for the detritus of history in an effort to reconstruct the uneven processes of urbanization before the modernization of the countryside was a fait accompli. Underpinning Storey's study is Bill Brown's argument that “literature can act as a unique form of historical record because it possesses ‘the capacity to preserve (however marginally) residues of phenomena that remain in some sense unrecognizable  …  in our existing historiographic registers’” but which are nevertheless “‘lying in wait’” (2, 4). “I share,” Storey acknowledges, “[Brown's] understanding of the ‘archaeological task’ of literary criticism as ‘developing a chain of associations that seem, retrospectively, to have converged already in the literary work, a task charged with ‘representing the convergence as an image that freshly elucidates the signifying structures and material changes of everyday life—the task, in other words, of producing the history that lingers within neglected images, institutions, and objects’” (20).

In particular, Storey reads for the “synecdochal counterparts” of modernity, including “train journeys, traveling circuses, country doctors, and lynch mobs,” whose entry into narratives of rural life wrought havoc on sedimented social mores and at times led to defensive posturings to maintain a grip on an older sense of place and culture (20). In short, their place in the novels and stories he analyzes concretize the “invisible relations” of modernization (149), the hard-to-figure “flow[s] of capital and culture between city and country” that Storey “chains” together to make legible modernity's “‘absent presences’ in rural fiction” (2). “[N]ovels and short stories that seem to have only a tenuous connection with the urban-industrial realities of Gilded Age America” become a privileged site for understanding the highly contested and uneven history by which the “standardizing and flattening processes” of urbanization and industrialization brought rural America into its network (3). The point of Storey's decentered approach to reading the representations of urbanization in the literature of the country, as opposed to in the literature of the city, is to reveal “the social reach and cultural penetration of modernity's geographical dimension” (14). In doing so, he works to dispel “the idealization of and nostalgia toward rural life” undergirding nationalistic sentiment from early republican rhetoric to the present day by underscoring the putatively idyllic countryside as a site of struggle. One thinks here of the groundwork laid by Raymond Williams in a different national context when he undoes the rural and urban binary in The Country and the City (1973) by showing how the English countryside was inextricably intertwined with capitalist development. Part of Williams's work, too, was to demystify the idea of a lost Golden Age of pastoral sociocultural unity and innocence that was advanced by English writers, poets in particular. The pastoral romance is “myth functioning as a memory,” Williams argued, whose ideological function is to mask conflicts of value between residual feudal and dominant capitalist orders as well as to conceal material conflicts between classes over property ownership and industrialization (43). What Rural Fictions, Urban Realities unveils through its own analysis of modernity's “synecdochal counterparts” is the centrifugal distribution of modernity's ideological apparatuses, most especially the imposition of newly standardized capitalist temporality, the emergence of commercial spectacle, the encroachment of modern medicine and scientific orthodoxy, and the coercive expansion of bureaucratic justice, from the urban center into the American hinterlands where they “visibly collide” with “residual social practices” (139).

Storey's “recurrent argument” is comprised of two lines: the first more well-traveled one is that “the processes of modernity also happen in the rural space”; the second more insightful one, in my opinion, is “that in representing that space, sometimes counter to their intentions, works of rural fiction uniquely record the social experience and cultural impact of modernity's transformations” (22). I would like to dwell briefly on this aside, because here Storey suggests something about the relation between rural fiction and urban realities that is transportable to the analysis of other literary and cultural materials and that may further refine our thinking about their representations of abstract socioeconomic forces. Rather than reading the rural literature of Gilded Age America as the site of the melancholic loss of national innocence or as the recuperable (if still reactionary) site of resistance to the “flow of capital, rationalization, the rise of professionalization, and technological industrialism” (both of which are different species of sentimental discourse), Storey sees them as failures (18). And by failures, I mean he treats this literature as aesthetically incoherent, inconsistent, and unsettled, seeing it as constantly sundering the taxonomic categories we may assign to it. Just to consider one example, he scrutinizes multiple narrative occasions precipitated by the arrival and departure of trains, “an obvious physical link to the expanding urban world” of commodity and knowledge circulation, human mobility, and the conquest of nature whose “life-altering presence in rural communities” was both “intrusive and emancipatory” (53). In Maurice Thompson's story “Hoiden,” from the largely forgotten collection Hoosier Mosaics (1875), for instance, we find a middle-aged farmer named Luke with 2,000 acres of rich prairieland pitted against a railway developer determined to run a line through it. When one day the train arrives bearing the beautiful unmarried woman of the title, the railway prospector's daughter, Thompson's otherwise realist short story radically shifts registers into a rhapsodic and thoroughly romantic celebration of the golden landscape. For Luke, Hoiden simultaneously comes to represent over the course of the story the chance to “escape the hard toil of farm life” and the “emotional ruin” that will almost certainly follow from the loss of his attachment to the land (31). The story ends with the good farmer empty-handed, losing Hoiden, who leaves for South America by train (of course), and losing control over his own land, now traversed by railroad tracks that house a station on his property. The text's earlier eruption of pastoral romanticism turns out to be not only a celebration of the land but also an unconscious prefiguring of the eventual loss of bucolic peace with which it concludes. Storey locates numerous similar instances in Gilded Age literature, moments when realist texts falter, their generic integrity crumbling while they turn romantic, gothic, sentimental, and even proto-modernist with the disruptive intrusion of the urban. In this sense, the uneven development of rural geography matches the uneven aesthetic sensibility of the literary terrain and points up the unsettled status of the geographical imagination in the period as it attempts to formulate a response to shifting modes of production and the tumult of lived experience and lived space that such changes usher forth. Long synonymous with the city, modernization, and modernity should be viewed more expansively as a “system of social, economic, and political relations” that flows beyond geographical and generic boundaries (16). If one accepts Marshall Berman's characterization that “[t]o be modern  …  is to experience personal and social life as a maelstrom, to find one's world and oneself in perpetual disintegration and renewal, trouble and anguish, ambiguity and contradiction,” these texts, despite recording the world of fields, farms, and small towns of America surely qualify (345).

“[T]he categories of ‘urban’ and ‘rural’ both break down, and constantly reassert themselves in the pages of rural fiction,” Storey contends, adding, that they “remain legitimate geographical classifications and yet become increasingly fictitious concepts” (3). At heart here is the challenge of analytically making sense of—and living in the midst of—“fictitious concepts” and the relations between them that are perpetually mobile and subject to constant redevelopment and renewal. “Space, place, and landscape  …  [e]ach  …  denotes not a fixed and static object so much as an ongoing process” engendered by capital's crisis-induced restructuring of rural and urban geographies so as to create surplus value, often with little attention to the human needs of occupants and users (Jarvis 6). As a result, capitalist urbanization simultaneously tends toward social and geographic homogeneity and difference. To depart from the specifics of Thompson's story while remaining with the railway development example for a moment longer: capital, in this instance, will have standardized part of the countryside by exploiting its reservoirs of natural resources and its increasingly superannuated farm labor, until rural space over time is transformed into another site for the reproduction of the social relations of capitalist production. But at the same time, it will have produced new, potentially disruptive sites of social difference through the importation of urban or international labor for railway construction, and with it the possibility of a whole other set of racial, gender, sexual, and cultural practices that will mix with residual ones in the newly fluid, hybridized terrains where the natural landscape and built spaces of urban industrialism intersect. What is made of such sites is overdetermined and hard to predict: they nonetheless point up the underappreciated “anarchic possibilities of economic production,” the volatile, potentially eruptive admixtures produced by capitalist development (Ferguson 8).

The reactions to the unsettling lived condition of social and geographic unevenness have been varied, but among them has been the physical seizure and reoccupation of expropriated public space and the discursive reappropriation and resignification of individual and communal history and memory within it. This isn't the story of Storey's book, but it is part of the story of Eric Avila's The Folklore of the Freeway, which provides a useful vehicle for thinking through the ways that race and class heavily inflect these issues. Avila's interdisciplinary study tells the “cultural history of interstate highway construction” from the 1950s to the 1970s, when some 42,800 miles of freeways were laid in the most capital-intensive building project in US history (ix, 1). If the railroad and its trains can be said to have helped install a uniform sense of “time consciousness that was at odds with the more traditional, cyclical patterns of rural life,” then it also might be said that the highway and its cars heralded another, new experience of time, one of individual, privatized flow en masse, and did so on an even greater scale (Storey 28). “The space-time feeling of our period can seldom be felt so keenly as when driving,” proclaimed the influential and prescient architectural historian Sigfried Giedion in 1941, shortly before the dawn of the interstate era and a mere 58 years after the standardization in the US of train time in 1883 (826). Avila's interest is not so much with those on the highway, as those next to it and under it, and the “fractured sense of historical time” that it inaugurates (115). Here the experience of historical time breaks down in troubling ways by class and racial privilege on a date that we might pinpoint to 1966 and the National Historic Preservation Act, a far-reaching law that mandates that federal agencies review the impact that federally funded projects may have on historic properties. The history of the revolt against the freeway is a tale of winners and losers, and in this fight an emergent discourse of historical preservation in the 1960s signaled a major victory on the part of mostly white communities in downtown San Francisco, Beverly Hills, SoHo, Greenwich Village, and the Vieux Carré of New Orleans, which successfully halted plans to plow highways through their neighborhoods. They could do so, in part, through lobbying efforts and protests that “suddenly invested,” in Avila's words, the neighborhood landscape with “historic meaning and significance” on the eve of its destruction (90). Essential to this endeavor was having not only the “right” story to tell about the neighborhood but also access to power so that it would be heard and access in other words to social and political networks with city councilpersons, business people, and journalists that white upper-middle-class status permitted.

All histories are fictions. And all histories are selective, but in the case of communities that stopped or rerouted highways bearing down on them, they were able to draw upon their neighborhoods’ landmark architecture, storied pasts that often included rich literary and artistic heritage, and deep social histories with established white ethnic-American cultural traditions. What does and does not count as historic is a political question and in the case of these saved communities, the answer to this question frequently entailed discursive acts of historical preservation and erasure. Put another way, in making the argument for why the way of life in their neighborhood should be preserved and its continuity with historical time maintained, white antihighway activists remembered their history, conveniently forgot others. Consider the case of Vieux Carré, which was threatened by the proposed six-lane elevated Riverfront Expressway. Historical preservationists “stressed the European heritage of the built environment” and saw the Quarter “not [as] the site of slave markets and race riots but, rather, [as] a genteel and ‘special combination of mossy courtyards and narrow streets cobwebbed with time’” (Avila 100). A deeply troubling racial history of blood and bondage was erased to make way for an aesthetically textured and quaint portrait of a neighborhood threatened by the monstrous functionalism of the highway. Berman himself lodges a similar, though more pointed critique, when he also detects an unnerving racial unconscious in Jane Jacobs's attack on 1950s city planning in The Death and Life of Great American Cities (1961). “It seems to me that beneath her modernist text there is an anti-modernist subtext,” he suggests “a sort of undertow of nostalgia for a family and a neighborhood in which the self could be securely embedded, ein'feste Burg, a solid refuge against all the dangerous currents of freedom and ambiguity in which all modern men and women are caught up” (324). Berman posits, “This is what makes her neighborhood vision seem pastoral: it is the city before the blacks got there” (324). Or it is a city after “blacks” left. “Jacobs's appreciation for the architectural remnants of the city's past furthered the gentrification of a distinguished neighborhood,” Avila writes, concluding that “For all the grassroots rhetoric, the success of the visible freeway revolt has left us with some of the nation's most exclusive enclaves of wealth and privilege” (99, 193)

Communities of color fared much more poorly in their battles against the freeway. “[T]he preservation strategy had no chance,” Avila notes (117). “Highway planners, like others charged with the responsibilities of planning and managing cities,” he writes, “targeted not people of color but the spaces in which they lived,” In reality, however, the distinction mattered little. (39). Their “communities were ripped up, gutted, ensnared, isolated, and altogether erased” (4). Beyond the history of environmental racism, what interests me here are the differing structures of feeling that arise in regards to the unsettling of time by urban development. Architecture, streets, and public spaces such as parks and playgrounds are sedimentations of time—history and memory in material form—and with their loss memorialization tends to move into other mediums and assume new meanings. It's not a subject that Avila probes deeply, but his comparative study initiates what I hope will be additional research. He shows that the acts of historical preservation that staved off an impending crisis for white communities were (and continue to be), for communities of color, acts of historical recovery after a crisis unfolded, a post facto reinvention of the past constituted by a rupture in historical continuity brought about by the material upheaval of neighborhoods. As Jan Lin has shown in The Power of Urban Ethnic Places (2011), recovery efforts have largely taken the form of rebuilt or newly established ethnic heritage districts and education outreach by cultural organizations and museums bolstering local economic development, tourism, and cultural remembrance and pride. Ethnic cultural heritage plays a powerful role, Lin argues, in “promoting neighborhood stability and sustainability through fostering community and solidarity and self-identity,” and in reweaving the thread of time “so that new generations can look back and comprehend with better insight the trajectory of their posterity” (10).

These recovery efforts are also historical fictions, as Avila underscores in the case of the Overtown Historic Folklife Village in Miami, Florida and the Rondo Days Festival in St. Paul, Minnesota. By the mid-1950s, Overtown was a thriving capital of African American and Caribbean black culture in the South, but by the early 1960s much of the neighborhood was leveled by I-95, its population declining by over 75% in the decade. Constructed in the aftermath of this trauma, the Folklife Village cultural and entertainment area is an effort to renew and heal the neighborhood by “reassert[ing] the visibility of black history in Miami against the erasure of the past” (115). But it does so in a way that is “nostalgic, sanitized, and commercial,” a simulacrum of historical realness neatly packaged in the form of reproductions of historic theaters, a Jazz Walk of Fame, a center for genealogical research, restaurants, and arts-oriented retail. The Folklife Village, Avila writes, “is part of a broader tendency to romanticize the insular world of pre-civil rights black urban communities” (115). “Like many landscapes deemed ‘historical,’” he continues, “the Folklife Village presents an invented tradition in which selected elements of a community's past have been rescued from obscurity and assigned a new set of cultural meanings” (115). Thousands of miles north, the Rondo neighborhood met a similar fate and articulated a similar response. For decades, the diverse district of Rondo housed a populous community of African-Americans railroad workers, along with Russian, Polish, German, Italian, and Irish immigrants, until in the 1960s when I-94 bisected the neighborhood's cultural and commercial center, resulting in racially unequal patterns of displacement. Upwards of 90% of white residents moved to other neighborhoods, while only 15% of the African Americans in Rondo, as a result of housing discrimination, could leave (103). The Rondo Days Festival, which began in 1982, and the Rondo Oral History Project, launched in 2002, are a “direct and lasting consequence” of the freeway (101). However, in their efforts to discursively recover and reconstruct the old Rondo before the arrival of the interstate through parades, dances, performances, political speeches, and traveling exhibits of photographs and interview transcripts, the annual summer festival and oral history project do not just recover the collective memory of the former neighborhood, they rewrite it: “Whereas the neighborhood had been racially and ethnically diverse, its memory is black,” more racially homogenous, Avila observes, than it had been, adding that “[t]hrough such efforts, ‘Rondo’ now connotes black pride and identity in the upper Midwest in a way that it had not before” (109).

Avila eventually lands on “the great paradox of this story: that the modernist city, which bulldozed its way through history and tradition to implement its totalizing vision, actually begot sharply particular expressions of racial memory and pride” (118). To develop that paradox further, the later chapters of The Folklore of the Freeway showcase the work of David Botello, Carlos Almaraz, Lorna Dee Cervantes, Helena Maria Viramontes, along with the work of anonymous graffiti writers, muralists, and street musicians who narrativized the freeway in stories and poems about communities dislocated by construction, who painted scenes of civil rights marches, Aztec deities, and Mexican revolutionaries directly on the freeway's pylons, and who used its underpasses as sound stages for celebrations of black culture. In short, Avila sets out to show “not only what freeways do to inner-city people, but also what people do to inner-city freeways” (5). This is not so much the work of black or brown urban entrepreneurship, capital redevelopment, and the now-booming heritage industry, but the symbolic work of appropriation and improvisation that refracts the experience of the highway through “the prisms of identity, language, and place” (5). It is the perspectives of a new, more diverse set of social actors that, beginning in the 1970s, helped pluralize the urban landscape by reinvigorating ethnic memory. By doing so, this cultural work also performed another service: it productively “destabilized the notion of the city as a holistic reality, replacing that useful fiction with a dawning sense of the city as a highly fragmented and wholly unstable hodgepodge of diverse communities, with its own languages, lifestyles, and worldviews” (192).

In the background of Avila's study, but signaled prominently in its subtitle, is the story of the transformation of one urban form into another, the story of the decline of the modernist city and the emergence of the postmodern one brought about in part by racial and ethnic activism in the 1960s and 1970s that demanded social and environmental justice, the dismantling of race, class, and gender barriers constructed in the interstate era, and the creation of new models of spatial organization for city life. If the early history of the postmodern city has shown us anything thus far, it is even greater degrees of social polarization, more highly splintered forms of inequality, and “socially produced amnesia” and spectacle that coexist with our contemporary period's fascination with history and memory (Huyssen 6). It is not surprising, however dispiriting it may be, to see now emerging from our present condition of worsening social and economic precarity a nostalgia for the fantasy of material abundance and unlimited promise of the idyllic postwar decades, the very years of the modernist city's more predictable exploitations and injustices. As Lauren Berlant has documented in Cruel Optimism (2011), it is the dangerous wish for certainty and security in our neoliberal moment when the horizons for human happiness and dignity are shrinking, a desire that she unflinchingly describes as unfolding “amid the slow train wreck that is always coming in the catastrophic time of capitalism, where if you're lucky you get to be exploited, and if you're lucky you can avoid one more day being the focus of a scene that hails and ejects you when it is your time to again become worthless” (171). As the “useful fiction” of a prior age's “holistic reality” is reanimated (Avila 192), I think of the Brechtian maxim “Don't start from the good old things but the bad new ones” (qtd. in Benjamin 121), as well as Huyssen's sobering reminder that “the past cannot give us what the future has failed to deliver” (27). To stay with Huyssen for a moment longer, the challenge is how “to secure some continuity within time, to provide some extension of lived space within which we can breathe and move” (24). Obviously, what Huyssen calls for requires something other than the creative forgetting Nietzsche once advocated, an ill-advised relinquishing of a past that might serve as the very means of imagining the future while providing a ground for life. Huyssen's challenge entails a new, more troubling relationship to history and memory. He presses us to understand that heritages and identities do not lie in wait for us to claim them like pre-existing entities, but to see them instead as constructed in and through struggles in the present (Edensor 138). We might begin, Tim Edensor suggests, by “[r]efusing the false securities of a stable and linear past” and replacing them with creative acts of “dis(re)membering” in which the sheer alterity of the past, its “obscurity and unknowability,” is the starting point for remaking, reordering, and representing it (138). Such an approach would guard against the monological discourse of both official and alternative urban histories, as well as the false comforts of sentimentalism, and compel us to do the ongoing work of constructing and revising our meanings about the past in the spaces of our present that are forever in the process of being torn down and rebuilt anew.

Note
1	See among others, Jarvis; Carlo Rotella's October Cities: The Redevelopment of Urban Literature (1998); Catherine Jurca's White Diaspora: The Suburbs and the Twentieth-Century American Novel (2001); Betsy Klimasmith's At Home in the City: Urban Domesticity in American Literature and Culture, 1850–1930 (2005); Scott Herring's Another Country: Queer Anti-Urbanism (2010); Hsuan L. Hsu's Geography and the Production of Space in Nineteenth-Century American Literature (2010); and my Urban Underworlds: A Geography of Twentieth-Century American Literature and Culture (2010).
Works Cited
Avila Eric. The Folklore of the Freeway: Race and Revolt in the Modernist City . Minneapolis: U of Minnesota P, 2014.

Benjamin Walter. Understanding Brecht . Trans. Anna Bostock. New York: Verso, 1998.

Berlant Lauren. Cruel Optimism . Durham: Duke UP, 2011.

Berman Marshall. All That Is Solid Melts into Air: The Experience of Modernity . New York: Penguin, 1988.

Edensor Tim. Industrial Ruins: Space, Aesthetics and Materiality . Oxford: Berg, 2005.

Ferguson Roderick. Aberrations in Black: Toward A Queer of Color Critique . Minneapolis: U of Minnesota P, 2003.

Freud Sigmund. Civilization and Its Discontents . Trans. James Strachey. New York: Norton, 1961.

Giedion Sigfried. Space, Time and Architecture.  Cambridge: Harvard UP, 1941.

Huyssen Andreas. Present Pasts: Urban Palimpsests and The Politics of Memory . Stanford: Stanford UP, 2001.

Jarvis Brian. Postmodern Cartographies: The Geographical Imagination in Contemporary American Culture . New York: St. Martin's, 1998.

Lin Jan. The Power of Urban Ethnic Places: Cultural Heritage and Community Life . New York: Routledge, 2011.

Sheller Mimi, Urry John. “The City and the Car.” The City Cultures Reader.  2nd ed. Ed. Miles Malcolm, Hall Tim, Borden Iain. London: Routledge, 2000. 202–19.

Soja Edward. Postmodern Geographies: The Reassertion of Space in Critical Social Theory . New York: Verso, 1989.

Stevens Wallace. “Description Without a Place.” The Collected Poems of Wallace Stevens . New York: Knopf, 1955. 339–46.

Storey Mark. Rural Fictions, Urban Realities: A Geography of Gilded Age American Literature . Oxford: Oxford UP, 2013.

Williams Raymond. The Country and the City . Oxford: Oxford UP, 1973.
