Beyond Preservation: Using Public History to Revitalize Inner Cities by Andrew Hurley
Michael A. Tomlan

Andrew Hurley, Beyond Preservation: Using Public History to Revitalize Inner Cities (Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press, 2010).

Beyond Preservation seeks to demonstrate how, through the strategic use of public history, historic preservation might become a more effective instrument for inner-city neighborhood revitalization. Andrew Hurley argues that “inner-city communities can best turn preserved landscapes into assets by subjecting them” to grass roots public interpretation (p. ix).

From the outset Hurley joins those public historians who welcome more open discussion at the local level about the interpretation of the urban scene. He has been deeply involved in community-based history projects at the Community History Research and Design Services (CHRDS) unit of the Public Policy Research Center at the University of Missouri, St. Louis, a unit that Hurley and public archaeologist Timothy Baumann established in 2003. They drew on the experience of people with similar interests around the country in developing a number of local history projects in St. Louis, and co-authored an article that lies at the core of this book.

The opening chapter provides a general overview of urban revitalization, centered on the 1970s and 1980s. Hurley follows the critique of David Hamer and others, who hold that early historic districts often presented a static view of history. The selective interpretation of the past served to alienate certain residents, particularly those whose everyday life in no way resembled the activities of the people who were celebrated during the golden era of the neighborhood. Hurley also holds that the emphasis on the economic “magic” of the rehabilitation tax credit programs at the national and state levels did little or nothing to help the people in the neighborhoods in which he has worked.

Seeking a better alternative, public historians and archaeologists sought “increasingly sophisticated techniques for engaging diverse urban constituencies in the act of historical interpretation” (p. 31). This search proceeds in Chapter 2 with James Loewen’s discovery. When surveying the monuments, markers, and historic sites during the 1990s, he found women and African Americans were woefully underrepresented and Native Americans were often shown in an unflattering fashion. A fresh wave of research began to correct many of the omissions and mistakes and a sense of “shared authority” among the scholars, exhibit designers and community audiences began to generate alternative histories more relevant to urban residents.

Hurley then turns to the “construction of urban locations” to describe how historians in the 1980s and 1990s began to view space as a container of events and as a “dynamic force in the shaping and articulation of social processes” (p. 39). This leads Hurley to discuss the merits of Dolores Hayden’s “Power of Place” experiment, the nonprofit corporation in Los Angeles begun in 1984 that “strove to weave women’s history and ethnic history into the downtown landscape” (p. 40).

To show how difficult the weaving process can become, Hurley describes the “uproar” over the African Burial Ground excavation in Manhattan. The discovery of a colonial era African cemetery on a construction site in 1991 stopped the U.S. General Services Administration from completing a project until the remains were moved to Howard University and a group of community representatives were permitted to care for them.

By contrast, Hurley offers positive examples of community involvement, that is, archaeology projects in Annapolis, Indianapolis, and especially Alexandria, Virginia, where thousands of volunteers became involved over the decades, not only excavating, but cataloguing and researching, giving tours, and creating displays.

The author’s chief contribution lies in Chapter 3, which deals with his work in North St. Louis. While downtown had remained the center of attention, the Old North St. Louis area lacked social connections, had insufficient capital, and absorbed the African American poor who relocated from crumbling urban renewal public housing projects. The creation of the Old North St. Louis Restoration Group in 1981 marked a turning point in that neighborhood’s thinking, as it looked to stabilize the physical character of the area. The blue collar origins of the community remained central to the story being told in its tours of the historic homes.

The U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development invited the Restoration Group to partner with the University of Missouri, St. Louis, to assist disadvantaged neighborhoods in historic preservation work. The Restoration Group applied for a grant to establish a Community Outreach Partnership Center (COPC), and was awarded $400,000 to create the Old North Neighborhood Partnership Center and develop programs with the University over a three-year period. Launched in September 2001, COPC was a small local history committee with history and anthropology faculty and four local residents, mostly white, Polish and Catholic. They delved into neighborhood history, nominated streets for redesign and renaming, conducted video documentation, and created a history trail. The principal idea was to move away from the “succession model” of in-migrating populations and move toward an “accumulation model” in which people could see the connection to their own history, making them participants rather than observers.

To his credit, Hurley’s account includes the frustrations and the disappointments that arise in this kind of work. For example, only 10 people attended one public meeting that was widely publicized. While the social relations in a neighborhood are good, they are by no means rosy.

What emerges so strongly is the discontinuity of local history-making. Although several individuals or groups may have participated in the same events, and thereby have participated in creating history, their viewpoints are by no means consistent. When the funding stopped, the COPC project and meaningful public history work ended.

In the subsequent chapters the author provides insight into a wide range of local public history projects in New York, Detroit, and Chicago that have trajectories similar to the ones in St. Louis. Unfortunately, Hurley apparently did not have the time to flesh out these case studies as well as the St. Louis ones. Nevertheless I found Beyond Preservation valuable because it provides lessons for those who are considering embarking on public history projects in the inner city, explaining just how frustrating they can become. This kind of community service is hard work. But there are overriding benefits to participating in a city’s evolution and writing about it.
