Getting Into the Game Our students are increasingly bored in school Perhaps they should spend more time playing games. Henry Jenkins AArecent survey of students at more than 20 U.S. colleges and universities revealed some startling statistics: All the students had played a video, computer, or online game, and 65 percent described themselves as "regular or occasional" game players. Almost half (42 percent) said that playing games sometimes kept them from studying—in fact, 9 percent said that their main motivation for playing games was to avoid studying. In an especially galling statistic for educators, 52 percent ofthe students admitted to playing recreational electronic games during class. Today s college students spend more time playing games than they spend going to movies, watching television, or reading books for pleasure Clones, 2003). ITiesc recreational preferences take sliapc at an early age. A study by the Kaiser Family Foundation (2003) found that 50 percent of U.S. children have played computer games b) the time they are 6 years old. And video games are a regular part of many teenagers' lives: A study dating back to 2001 showed that approximately 84 percent of 12- to 17-year-olds surve)'ed owned a video game console; 38 percent played video games for an hour or more every week ('ITiibodeaiix, 2001). In recent years tliis number has only grown. The term electronic game encompasses a wide range of products, from shooting games involving extreme violence to sports simulations to fantasy adventure games to puzzlers or brainteasers. Each category has distinct characteristics, but they also have qualities in common: They all have mles and goals, provide immediate feedback, and create an interactive, virtual environment in which the player has to struggle against some kind of opposition (Mitchell & Savill-Smith, 2004). What's in a Game? Nobody would propose electronic games as a panacea for the problems plaguing contemporary' educatit)n, but educators could leam something from the holding power of such games. The worst thing a kid can say about a homework assignment is that it s t<K> hard; the worst thing a kid can sa>' about a game is that it s too easy. Students who give up on difficult assignments will The worst thing a kid can say about a honnework assignment is that its too hard; the worst thing a kid can say about a game is that it s too easy. Some social commentators decry the growing amount of time that children and teenagers spend playing electronic games and allege that some play can have harmful side effects, such as increased aggression and reduced physical activit>^ (Mitchell & Savill-Smith. 2004). A growing body of research disputes such claims as exaggerated or ill-founded Oenklns. 2004a, 2004b). In any case, our students' fascination with such games Ls unlikely to fade. Instead of swimming against the tide, educators should consider the lessons that the gaming revolution can teach us. It's time for schools to get into the game. stay up until dawn trying to master the next level of a challenging game, in contrast, many students fmd school less than compelling. The concept of intrinsic motivation may explain the difference between the effort young people devote to games and the effort they often invest in their schoolwork. Intrinsic motivation refers to activities that we do for their own sake rather than for an external reward, whether cash or grades. A story that anthropologist Mary Louise Pratt shares about her son's interest in baseball card collecting demonstrates the power of this kind of leaming: 48 EDUCATIONAL LrADiiKsiiii'/Ai'B II. 2005 Sam . . . leamtd a lot about phonics that year by tr> ing to decipher surnames on baseball cards, and a lot about cities, states, heights, weights, places of birth, stages of life. Baseball cards opened the door to baseball books, shelves and shelves of encyclopedias, magazines, histories, biographies, novels, btjoks of jokes, anecdotes, cartoons, even poems. Literac>' beg;m for Sam with the newly pronounceable names on the picture cards and brought him what has been easily the broadest, most varied, most rewarding, and most integrated experience of his t3-ycar life. (1991, pp. 33-34) This playful activity, besides clemandmg certain skills and practices that had clear academic payoffs, helped Sam develop a sense of himself as a learner. He learned the meaning of expertise, of kncjwing about somethitig well enough that you can start a conversation with a stranger and feel sure of holding yotir own" (Pratt, 1991, p. 34). In other words, the baseball cards did for Sam what existing school materials often fail to do: 1 hey not only motivated him to develop basic competencies but also enabled and enticed him to enter ever more specialized domains of knowledge. Current literature on games, play, and learning reaffirms Pratt s observations. For example, Gee (2004) compares the complexity of what kids leam by playing Pokemon with the much more restricted vocabulary we ask them to master at school. The difference in performance reflects the higher degree of personal and social investment that kids have in leaming about Pokemon. Kids leam vocabular> in Pokemon by putting it into action as they immediately transform abstract concepts and classifications into elements in the game, fhey are motivated to master this content because they are actually engaging in something they want to dt)—an activit)- that their peer ctilture values. Papert (1998) uses the term bard fun to describe the educationally compelling and valuable quality of the best commercial games. Papert asks, "Did you ever hear a game advertised as being easy?" He urges tis to consider why young people fmd difficult gimies enjoyable when they find difficult schoolwork merely frustrating. At their best, games put kids in chaise of their own leaming and, at the same time, make them conscious of the learning process itself by presenting challenges they need to work through or arotmd. As one of the foimders of the Education Arcade, a research collaborative started at MIT that seeks to explore and promote the pedagogical potential of computer and video games, 1 have spent the last few years revie'wing research on games and leaming, building prototypes for educational games, and developing curriculum to support the educational use of existing commercial games. Here are some of the things we have learned about the kinds of intrinsic motivations for leaming built into games. Games loiver the threat of failure. In school, students often face considerable anxiety and sometimes harsh penalties if they make mistakes, ln games, the best way to leam is to plunge in, make mistakes, lose your life, and then reboot so you can tr^' again. Thus, games ASSOCIATION FOR SIPERVISION AND CURRICIII.HM DEVELOPMENTencourage exploration and experimentation. They do not give us answers that they ask us to memorize; instead, they ask us to make our own discoveries and then apply what we leam to new contexts. Games foster a sense of engagement through immersion. Tlie depersonalized and abstract prose of textbooks locks sttidents out of the worlds those books describe. In the compelling microworids constructed by games, however, kids can move about and have some stake in the events tliat unfold there. They can maniptilate variables and see the conseqtiences of their choices. Of course, game simulations cannot mirror every aspect of the phenomenon they represent, but the same can be said for the maps, charts, and graphs commonly found in textbooks. Games sequence tasks to allow earlysuccess. They maintain a threshold at which players feel challenged hut not overwhelmed. The aesthetics of ctirrent game design first emei^ed when games were coin-operated arcade attractions. Tlie prevailing wisdom was that the game should allow you to score an initial \'ictor>' and then present yoti with a slightly bigger challenge that would motivate you to keep puttitig in quarters because you always felt on the vei^e of stfccess. As it happens, this sense of always being challenged and on the verge of succeeding is also a powerful motivation for leaming. Games link learning to goals and roles. When we approach designing educational games, the first question we ask the content experts is. "What does the information allow you to do?" Mo.st textbooks never address this question. Games motivate leaming by setting clear goals or allowing players to set their own goals, (lames not only provide a rationale for leaming but also create a context in which players immediately use what they learn to solve a compelling problem that has real consequences within the virttial world of the game. Games create a social context that connects learners to others who share their interests. Ciame scholars tise the temi metagaming to refer to the discussions that occur as players share evaluations, experiences, tips, and knowledge with one another. Metagaming parallels what educators tell us about peer-topeer teaching: The act of sharing what we know solidifies our own understanding and also provides a sense of empowerment and expertise. Games are mtdtimodal. Because different learners respond better to different ways of depicting tiie world and because conceptual tinderstanding gets .solidified as we process infomiation in many different forms, leaming experiences arc more powerful when the)' incorporate multiple modes of representation—including text, photographs, graphics, or moving images (Kress. 2003). Most games offer mtiltlple perspectives and often ask the player to assume mtiltiple roles in the course of the game play. Games support early steps into a new domain. Games not only provide a virttial environment for rehearsing skills and mastering knowledge but ;Uso provide a framework that motivates additional research and leaming. Players seek out additit)na! infomiation that helps them flesh out the microworld. Even if the game doesn t provide an opportunity to deploy that infomiation through play, this knowledge makes the game pla)- a more immersive experience. Bringing Games into the Classroom As we have begun to develop games that can function as cla.ssroom resources, we have tried to build on these insights. Consider, for example, Revolution, a game we are developing for use in higli school and middle school U.S. histor>' classes. In Revolution, sttidents assume the roles of 50 EDUCATIONAL LI;ADEK.S[[[1'/AI'RII. 2005 townsfolk in Colonial Williamsbtirg, Virginia, as they go about their business and make political decisions on the eve of the American Revolution. Most of the major incidents and characters in the game are drawn from news reports in the Virginia Gazette, the major newspaper in WiUiamsburg in the 1770s. Students can read stories from the paper in preparation for playing the game. After they play, they can read further accounts to see how the actual commtinity responded to the ^ historic situations, or : they can write their own I news reports to describe "^ how the events played I out within the game. © The game thus provides a solid context for students to leam from primary source materials, a skill emphasized by many state social studies standards. At the same time, each student has a distuictive experience, seeing the events through the eyes of a character of a specific class, race, gender, and political identit)- and making choices that affect the otitcome of events. Playing these individual roles encourages students to participate in class discussions and thus provides an incentive to leam core vocabular)' to share their perspectives. But teachers do not need to use games specifically designed for edtication to tap the leaming potential of games in their classroom teaching. Kurt Squire, codeveloper of/?ef'O/M/^/O« and one of the codirectors of the Education Arcade, has introduced Cii'ilization III into high school geography and history classes with positive results. Civilization III is a commercially developed strategy game in which players shape the growth and development of a historical civilization, negotiating trade agreements or pltinging the civilization into war. Squire has found that playing this game helps sttidents develop a strong conceptual framework for tinderstanding the logic of historical change— for example, thinking about the role of resources or geographic location in determining the rate at which civ'ilizations develop. Students also use a bnxtd array of vocabulary words often References Gee, J. P. (2004). Langtiage, learning, and gaming: A critic/ue of traditional scbooiing. New York: Routledge, Jenkins, H. (2004a). Making meaning, not war: Rethinking the video game violence debate. Independent Schools, Jenkins. H. (2OO4b>. Reality bytes: Eight myths about t'ideo games debunked [Onlinel. Available: www.pbs.org/kcts /videogamerevoluUon/impact/m>T:hs .html In games, the best way to learn is to plunge in, make mistakes, lose your life, and then reboot so you can try again. included on standardized social studies tests—from monarchy to moitotheism— as they analyze and articulate their game-play experience (Squire, 2004). In both of these examples, the game serves as part of a larger edtication trajectory. Social studies teachers have long used role-playing to help students understand global politics or Iiistorical events from different perspectives. For example, the Model United Nations is essentially a role-playing game that teachers use as a catalyst to get students excited about tmderstanding multinational politics. Sttidents don t just show up and participate in the Model United Nations assembly; they spend weeks preparing, doing librar>' research, listening to relevant lectures, and reading in the textbook. Ideally, the role-pla>' leads to other leaming activities, such as writing assignments, class discussions, and oral presentations. The educational use of electronic simulation games works the same way—not as a replacement for good teaching or tried-and-tme methods, but as a tool that good teachers can use to spark leaming and to provide a context for a range of other related experiences. More and more teachers are bringing games into their classrooms on these terms. [3 Jones, S. (2003). Let the games begin: Gaming technologies and entertainment among coliege students. Washington, DC: Pew Intemet and American Life Project. Kiiiser Family Foundation. (2()O3). Age zero to six: tiiectronic media in the lit'es of infattts and preschool children. Menlo Park, CA: Author. Kress. G. (2(H)3). Literacy' in the new media age. London: Routledge, MitcheU. A., & Savill-Smith. C. (2004). We ftse of computer and video games for learning: A review of the literatttre. London: Learning & Skills Development Agency. Available: vtTvw.lsda.org.uk /Hles/PDF/1529.pdf Papert, S. (1998. June). Does easy do it? Children, games, and learning. Game Developer. 88. Available: www . jiapc rt. o rg/art icle.s/Doescasydoit. html Pratt, M. L. (1991). Arts of the contact zone. Profession. 91, 33-40Squirc, K. (2004). Replaying hisloiy: Learning world history through playing Ciriiization III. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Indiana University School of Education. Bloomington, Indiana, Thibodeatix, T. (2001). Gaming: The first CF contact. Dealerscope: The Business ofCE Retailing, J(43), 42. Henry Jenkins is Director of the Comparative Media Studies Program, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts; 617-2533038; henry3@mit.edu. ASSOCIATION FOR SiiPiiRViyioN AN[) DEVELOPMENT 51 