Copyright @ 2014. Laurence King Publishing. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/18/2019 1:44 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES AN: 926193 ; Coates, Kathryn, Ellison, Andy.; An Introduction to Information Design Account: undeloan.main.ehost1This chapter aims to provide an insight into the subject of information design, to explain its purpose and the various forms it takes. We outline a brief history of information design to put the discipline in context, then discuss why it is necessary and how we use it in our daily lives. Finally, we look at the various ways in which it is presented and how the approach has to be modifi ed depending on the format. Chapter 1: What is information design? Copyright @ 2014. Laurence King Publishing. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/18/2019 1:44 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES AN: 926193 ; Coates, Kathryn, Ellison, Andy.; An Introduction to Information Design Account: undeloan.main.ehost10 Chapter 1 Defi nitions of information design In an age where we are bombarded with information, the boundaries between what is and what is not considered information design have become blurred. We consume thousands of pieces of information every day, often without even noticing, so what exactly is information design? ‘Information design is the defi ning, planning, and shaping of the contents of a message and the environments in which it is presented, with the intention to satisfy the information needs of the intended recipients.’ International Institute for Information Design (IIID) ‘In its broadest sense, all graphic design is “information design”. The distinction for me is that graphic design is the organization of elements that are typically capable of communicating independently, like words, photography and illustration. Information design, as I see it, incorporates the more elemental particles of data, and as a result requires more interpretation or authorship on the designer’s part for it to speak fl uently.’ Nicholas Felton, Feltron (USA) ‘It is the organization and display of information, messaging or storytelling in an ordered hierarchy. A journey of information. To present content in a clear and unique and engaging way by engaging and targeting the human senses through the use of graphic devices such as type, colour, imagery, time, light, textures and materials etc. to either warn, teach, explain, entertain or direct.’ Vince Frost, Frost Design (Australia) ‘Is there too much design now? Look on the web – is there a diff erent sort of design emerging? A creative world where designers seem to own what they are doing, a showing off if you like. A comfortable designers’ world where there is more of the same, time and again. To be a designer you surely need opinions – you must ask why. Why can’t you hear the train times? Why can’t elderly people understand Bluetooth? Why can’t I fi nd the lavatories at Terminal Five? We know and read the words about information design … Enabling, understanding, making information more useable, clarifying the complex and more … But think of yourself sitting in a room. No computer, no blogging, no music, with a Pentel sign pen in red and black and just a plan, some words and a problem. And you stay there until you have the answer. That’s information design.’ John Bateson, Bateson Studio (UK) ‘A certain type of information design sometimes seems to be about displaying a graphic designer’s prowess for creating aesthetically pleasing and colourful graphic representations of statistics or facts. Whilst this may look good, it often leads to a piece of work that inspires one to look, rather than read. For me, good information design should engage the reader both visually and cerebrally, off ering something beyond a surface impression.’ Dr Alison Barnes (Australia) Many people defi ne it diff erently. Some feel that it is simply the visualization of data; others see it as the communication of any message in any form. This could take the form of an advertisement or of a safety sign: both communicate a message or meaning to the viewer, and both deal with information, whether it is about selling a product or about preventing risks to health. Previous page: The Rosetta stone, an irregularly shaped block of black basalt, found in 1799 near the town of Rosetta (Rashid) near Alexandria by Napoleon’s armies. The stone is inscribed with a priestly decree issued at Memphis in 196 BCE on behalf of King Ptolemy V. The inscription appears in three scripts – ancient Egyptian hieroglyphs, Demotic script and ancient Greek – and provided the key to the decipherment of hieroglyphs in the modern age. Opposite: Cave painting showing horses, bulls and stags, in the Lascaux caves in southwestern France. The paintings are around 17,000 years old. Copyright @ 2014. Laurence King Publishing. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/18/2019 1:44 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES AN: 926193 ; Coates, Kathryn, Ellison, Andy.; An Introduction to Information Design Account: undeloan.main.ehostWhat is information design? 11 It would be impossible to give a detailed history of information design in just a few pages. It is, however, important to establish that information design is not a new invention: it has been with us for a very long time, albeit in diff erent forms, and has been vital to civilization and in communicating between cultures and generations. This section introduces the milestones in the development of information design from both our ancient and our recent past. Cave paintings Well before early versions of writing originated in Mesopotamia around 3000 BCE, images had been used as a way of communicating for thousands of years. Markings and drawings have been found all over the world, often carved into stones or drawn on rock faces. The best known of these are the cave paintings of Lascaux and Chauvet in France. Experts consider the latter to be among the oldest, at around 30,000 years old. The paintings show images of animals such as deer and bison, as well as lions, bears and hyenas and even birds from Paleolithic times. Little is known as to why early humans created these images, but they could be interpreted as a means of recording and educating communities, as well as a form of self-expression. These images could have had some signifi cance in prehistoric pagan cultures, perhaps used by the local shaman to contact spirits and infl uence the weather, fi nd new hunting grounds and heal the sick. These cave paintings represent the fi rst attempts to convey information visually. They reveal how individuals communicated to each other about their habits, experiences and lifestyles. A brief history of information design Copyright @ 2014. Laurence King Publishing. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/18/2019 1:44 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES AN: 926193 ; Coates, Kathryn, Ellison, Andy.; An Introduction to Information Design Account: undeloan.main.ehost12 Chapter 1 Early forms of writing The earliest evidence of writing did not emerge until around 3000 BCE, in the Sumerian culture of Mesopotamia. This writing system was based on pictographs. It was read from top to bottom and was constructed on a grid with equal vertical and horizontal spacing. It is thought that this early version of writing was a system of accounting, as the fi rst written records are tablets that show commodities listed with accompanying names and numerals organized in columns. As the writing was inscribed, it would often be smeared as the scribe moved his hand across the writing surface. Consequently, scribes turned the pictographs on their sides and wrote the rows horizontally to make the writing easier. The pictographs became less literal-looking and began to represent ideas rather than physical objects, so a pictograph of the sun might mean ‘light’ or ‘day’. This in turn led to a form of rebus-style writing (substituting an image for a letter or word), which then developed into cuneiform – a phonographic writing system in which images represented sounds or syllables. In Egypt a similar system was utilized to communicate, though, unlike Sumerian script, this did not develop into a more abstract form of writing for almost 3,500 years. The Egyptians did, however, produce illustrated manuscripts using papyrus, a material similar to paper, that was made from the pith of the reed-like papyrus plant. The Egyptians combined both images and words to communicate information on papyrus scrolls, such as their religious Sumerian clay tablet, probably from southern Iraq, c. 3100–3000 BCE. The tablet is inscribed with cuneiform, an early form of writing inscribed with a sharp instrument. It records the allocation of beer. beliefs on the afterlife. These are well documented in the tombs of the pharaohs and also the religious scrolls found in Egypt. Over centuries of development, cuneiform and other ancient forms of pictographic writing turned into the alphabets and styles of writing we use to communicate today. As a result of this, communication between individuals can be more precise. Images can be restricting and open to misinterpretation, whereas words are unmistakable and can communicate complex ideas. Writing allows us to communicate to a mass audience and to document our history down the generations. It also allows us to exchange important information between cultures and races. Cartography Cartography, the science, skill or work of making maps, demonstrates the fi rst recognizable form of information design as we know it today. The ancient Egyptians created maps that communicated information about the stars. A star map dating from around 1500 BCE was discovered in the tomb of the great Senmut (a highranking offi cial in royal service to Thutmose II) near Luxor. This map apparently shows a gathering of planets in particular positions in the night sky, thereby referring to a specifi c point in time. The fi rst maps indicating land or territory are harder to identify. One artifact that could be described as an Copyright @ 2014. Laurence King Publishing. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/18/2019 1:44 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES AN: 926193 ; Coates, Kathryn, Ellison, Andy.; An Introduction to Information Design Account: undeloan.main.ehostearly land map was found in 1930 at a dig in the ruined city of Ga-Sur at Nuzi (the modern city of Yorghan Tepe), 200 miles north of the site of Babylon in modern-day Iraq. The map is drawn with cuneiform characters and symbols inscribed on a small clay tablet thought to date from 2500–2300 BCE. It represents a district bounded by hills or mountains and bisected by water. It is interesting to note that the hills or mountains are shown as overlapping semicircles – a device used by mapmakers and illustrators for centuries afterwards. By the 2nd century CE, mapmaking had become more sophisticated. Ptolemy, a Roman citizen of Egypt, was an astronomer and mathematician who wrote Geographia, or The Geography. This substantial work provided information about map projections on what was known about the world’s geography between 127 and 150 CE. Ptolemy was the fi rst recorded person to assign coordinates to geographic features and imposed a grid system on a map, using the same grid system for the entire globe. It is from the pioneering eff orts of early mapmakers such as Ptolemy that we are able to orient ourselves in our surroundings and fi nd our way from one place to another with such accuracy. Right (detail): Facsimile painting by Charles K. Wilkinson of the Astronomical Ceiling in the tomb of Senmut, near Luxor, Egypt, c. 1473–1458 BCE. Below: Cast of a Babylonian clay tablet inscribed with a map, c. 2500–2300 BCE, from Ga-Sur, Mesopotamia (modern Iraq). Copyright @ 2014. Laurence King Publishing. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/18/2019 1:44 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES AN: 926193 ; Coates, Kathryn, Ellison, Andy.; An Introduction to Information Design Account: undeloan.main.ehost14 Chapter 1 Charts and graphs Today, bar charts and graphs seem such an obvious way of presenting statistical data that it is easy to think anyone could have created them. Scottish economist and engineer William Playfair (1759–1823) is often credited with the invention of bar, line and pie charts. Large amounts of statistical data were available in the 18th century, but this was always presented in printed tabular form. Playfair had the idea of presenting data in illustrative form. The bar chart fi rst appeared in his Commercial and Political Atlas, published in 1786. In his Atlas he presented information on imports and exports from diff erent countries over the years, which he showed as line graphs. This meant that the reader could see the relationship between the various economic factors in quantitative graphical data. It was the fi rst step towards the visualization of data. This clever way of presenting data enables the eye to perceive instantly what the brain would take much longer to deduce from a table of numbers. This is what makes graphs work so well for scientists, businesspeople and others. The charts allow the numbers to speak to everyone in the same way. They transcend the boundaries of culture, language and race: a Russian person can understand the same graph just as well as a French person. Graphs make information easy to decode and accessible for a much wider audience. Top: ‘Exports and Imports of Scotland to and from diff erent parts for one Year from Christmas 1780 to Christmas 1781’, bar chart from William Playfair’s The Commercial and Political Atlas (1786). Above: ‘Exports and Imports to and from Denmark and Norway from 1700 to 1780’, graph from William Playfair’s The Commercial and Political Atlas (1786). Copyright @ 2014. Laurence King Publishing. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/18/2019 1:44 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES AN: 926193 ; Coates, Kathryn, Ellison, Andy.; An Introduction to Information Design Account: undeloan.main.ehostWhat is information design? 15 ISOTYPEs ISOTYPEs (short for International System of Typographic Picture Education) are an attempt to communicate information pictographically, through a standard visual language. They were created by Vienna-born political economist Otto Neurath (1882–1945) between the 1920s and 1940s. Following the First World War (1914–1918), Neurath felt it was vital to communicate important social and economic issues clearly. He believed that information should be comprehensible to all people, no matter their cultural or educational background. He is quoted as saying ‘words make divisions, pictures make connections’. A system of elementary pictographs was developed, completely void of decoration, in order to present complicated data visually. The pictographs were designed to represent subtle qualities within the data, and challenges such as how to represent an emigrant or an unemployed man through a pictograph had to be overcome. Along with scientist and mathematician Marie Reidermeister (later his wife), Neurath converted data from verbal and numerical form into visual layouts. ISOTYPEs by Otto Neurath representing diff erent groups of people, c. 1945. Otto & Marie Neurath Isotype Collection, University of Reading. A selection of Gerd Arntz’s ISOTYPEs, 1928–1965. Inspired by the artistic movement of Constructivism and the avant-garde New Typography movement of the 1920s and 1930s, German artist Gerd Arntz (1900– 1988) designed most of these pictographs; by 1940 there were more than 1,000. Simplicity was the key: a strict set of rules governed the pictographs to ensure they were consistent in their make-up and application. These specifi ed the use of text, colour and positioning. Neurath’s work had an enormous impact on information design. The conventions and simplifi ed visual imagery he produced helped to develop a universal visual language that can still be seen in the use of pictographs in signage and information systems worldwide. Copyright @ 2014. Laurence King Publishing. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/18/2019 1:44 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES AN: 926193 ; Coates, Kathryn, Ellison, Andy.; An Introduction to Information Design Account: undeloan.main.ehostFuniculaire de Montmartre Orlyval tarification spéciale Stade de France St-Denis St-Denis–Porte de Paris Basilique de St-Denis Porte de St-Ouen Lamarck Caulaincourt Jules Guy Joffrin Môquet Porte de Clichy Châtelet Les Halles Stalingrad Marcadet Poissonniers Hôtel de Ville Arts et Métiers Château Rouge Strasbourg St-Denis St-Mandé Hoche Marx Dormoy La Courneuve Aubervilliers Le Bourget Jaurès Place des Fêtes Belleville Jourdain Télégraphe Ourcq Porte de Pantin Jacques Bonsergent Saint-Fargeau Pelleport Porte de Bagnolet Danube Botzaris Buttes Chaumont République Parmentier Sèvres Babylone Richelieu Drouot Palais Royal Musée du Louvre Réaumur Sébastopol Raspail Pyramides Montparnasse Bienvenüe Mabillon Cluny La Sorbonne Malakoff Rue Étienne DoletChaussée d’Antin La Fayette Bonne Nouvelle Grands Boulevards Bourse Sentier Barbès Rochechouart La Chapelle Pigalle Poissonnière Liège Notre-Dame de-Lorette St-Georges Abbesses Anvers La Fourche Place de Clichy Pereire–Levallois Blanche Villiers Opéra Auber Havre Caumartin Trinité d’Estienne d'Orves Franklin D. Roosevelt Neuilly–Porte Maillot Avenue Foch Bir-Hakeim Invalides Pasteur Pont de l’Alma Javel André Citroën Javel Michel-Ange Molitor La Muette Michel-Ange Auteuil Boulainvilliers Champ de Mars Tour Eiffel Champs Élysées Clemenceau Trocadéro Avenue Henri Martin Avenue du Pdt Kennedy Commerce Félix Faure Rue de la Pompe Iéna Ranelagh Jasmin Exelmans Chardon Lagache Église d’Auteuil Duroc La Motte Picquet Grenelle Assemblée Nationale Varenne St-Michel Solférino Notre-Dame Musée d’Orsay Concorde Les Halles Jussieu Odéon Étienne Marcel Vavin St-Germain des-Prés St-Sulpice St-Placide Place Monge Tuileries Pont Neuf Notre-Dame des-Champs Luxembourg Port-Royal Louvre Rivoli St-Michel Bastille Daumesnil Reuilly–Diderot Père Lachaise Oberkampf Quai de la Rapée Saint Marcel Bercy Filles du Calvaire Chemin Vert St-Sébastien Froissart Rue des Boulets Charonne Sèvres Lecourbe Cambronne Pont Marie Sully Morland Philippe Auguste Alexandre Dumas Avron Voltaire Quatre Septembre St-Ambroise Rue St-Maur Pte de Vincennes Maraîchers Porte de Montreuil Robespierre Croix de Chavaux Buzenval Pyrénées Laumière Château d’Eau Porte Dorée Porte de Charenton Ivry sur-Seine Porte de Choisy Porte d’Italie Porte d’Ivry Olympiades Créteil–Université Créteil–L’Échat Maisons-Alfort Les Juilliottes Maisons-Alfort–Stade Denfert Rochereau Maison Blanche Censier Daubenton Tolbiac Le Kremlin Bicêtre Villejuif Léo Lagrange Villejuif Paul Vaillant-Couturier GlacièreCorvisart Nationale Chevaleret Cité Universitaire Gentilly Antony Malakoff Plateau de Vanves Mouton Duvernet Gaîté Edgar Quinet Bd Victor Issy Porte de St-Cloud Pantin Magenta Vitry sur-Seine Saint-Ouen Ledru-Rollin Ménilmontant Couronnes Colonel Fabien MontgalletMichel Bizot Charenton–Écoles Liberté Faidherbe Chaligny École Vétérinaire de Maisons-Alfort St-Paul Maubert Mutualité Cardinal Lemoine Temple Château Landon Bolivar Église de Pantin Bobigny–Pantin R. Queneau Riquet Crimée Corentin Cariou Porte de la Villette Aubervilliers–Pantin Quatre Chemins Fort d’Aubervilliers Les Gobelins Campo Formio Quai de la Gare Cour St-Émilion Pierre et Marie Curie DugommierBel-Air Picpus St-Jacques Dupleix Passy Alésia Pernety Plaisance Pte de Vanves Convention Vaugirard Porte de Versailles Corentin Celton Volontaires Falguière Lourmel Boucicaut Ségur Rue du Bac Rennes Saint François Xavier Vaneau École Militaire La Tour Maubourg Avenue Émile Zola Charles Mirabeau Michels Porte d’Auteuil Boulogne Jean Jaurès Billancourt Marcel Sembat Cité Alma Marceau BoissièreKléberGeorge V Argentine Victor Hugo Les Sablons Porte Maillot Pont de Neuilly Esplanade de La Défense St-Philippe du-Roule Miromesnil St-Augustin Courcelles Ternes Monceau Rome Malesherbes Wagram Porte de Champerret Anatole France Louise Michel Europe Le Peletier Cadet Pereire Brochant Mairie de Clichy Garibaldi Mairie de St-Ouen Carrefour Pleyel Simplon Bérault Richard Lenoir Goncourt Bréguet Sabin Rambuteau La Plaine Stade de France Madeleine Gabriel Péri Bibliothèque Fr. Mitterrand Les Agnettes Porte de Clignancourt Gare de l’Est Gare de Lyon St-Denis–Université Porte de la Chapelle La Courneuve 8 Mai 1945 Bobigny Pablo Picasso Pré St-Gervais Mairie des Lilas Mairie de Montreuil Gallieni Louis Blanc Porte des Lilas Gambetta Gare du Nord Charles de Gaulle Étoile Pont de Levallois Bécon Porte Dauphine La Défense Boulogne Pont de St-Cloud Châtelet Gare d’Austerlitz Nation Château de Vincennes Créteil Pointe du Lac Créteil–Préfecture Mairie d’Ivry Place d’Italie Villejuif Louis Aragon Mairie d’Issy Châtillon–Montrouge Pont de Sèvres Issy Val de Seine Gare St-Lazare Gare Montparnasse Haussmann St-Lazare Porte d’Orléans Balard Pont du Garigliano St-Lazare Asnières–Gennevilliers Les Courtilles CDG Grande Arche Orly Paris MR 32 46 • wap.ratp.fr www.ratp.fr Propriété de la RATP - Agence Cartographique - PMI 10-2011 - BO Design: bdcconseil - Reproduction interdite 16 Chapter 1 The geographically inaccurate map Most people are familiar with the iconic London Underground map, designed by English engineer Henry C. Beck (1902–1974) in 1933. This map was a major innovation of its time, because it does not take the form of a traditional, geographically correct, map. It presents a diagrammatic representation of the Underground in which accurate distances and realism are dispensed with (there is no need for such information when one is underground) in favour of clarity and usability. The result is a clear map drawn on a grid of horizontals, verticals and 45-degree diagonals, with bright colour-coding to identify the Above: Henry C. Beck’s map of the London Underground, 1933. Right, above: The New York Subway map, designed by Massimo Vignelli, 1972. Right: Map of the Paris Metro, based on Beck’s London Underground map. Reproduced by courtesy of RATP diff erent lines. The central section of the map is enlarged in proportion to the rest as it contains several complicated interchanges and more stations. Beck was a draughtsman who had worked on electrical circuits: the combination of circuit diagram and map was his idea. London Underground’s publicity department was initially sceptical about Beck’s design, but it printed a trial run and asked the public for feedback. The new map was found to be easy to read and functional, so it was implemented throughout the Underground system. It is now a design standard and has inspired subway and railway maps across the world. Copyright @ 2014. Laurence King Publishing. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/18/2019 1:44 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES AN: 926193 ; Coates, Kathryn, Ellison, Andy.; An Introduction to Information Design Account: undeloan.main.ehostWhat is information design? 17 The Graphical User Interface A Graphical User Interface (GUI) is the representation of information and actions available to a user through graphical icons and visual indicators. The actions are performed through direct manipulation of the graphical elements, rather than typed commands via text. We tend to take GUIs for granted; they include the word processor on our PC and the mobile phone interface we use to dial numbers and send text messages. Without these intuitive interfaces, we would have to use complicated computer code to control these devices. The evolution of computers began back in the 1950s, but the home computer, or personal computer, as we know it today, was developed in the 1970s. Xerox developed the Xerox Alto, the fi rst personal computer prototype, in 1973. It used a keyboard as an input device, a mouse as a pointing device and a video screen as a viewing device. In 1981, the introduction of Xerox Star brought in the fi rst GUI. Graphical icons were used to initiate operations and control the computer rather than typing in long lines of programming code. The machine was not developed beyond the prototype stage, as it was thought to be too expensive to be marketable. A young Steve Jobs (CEO of Apple Inc. until his death in 2011) had been to a presentation of the Xerox Star system and decided to build a GUI of his own. The result was the Apple Macintosh, which launched in 1984. The interface used a desktop metaphor, with fi les, folders and even a wastebasket or trash can. It featured overlapping windows to separate operations. The system also included a keyboard and mouse as input devices. Since the GUI was embedded into the operating system, all the application software employed the same methods to perform tasks, making it easy to learn new pieces of software. In 1990, Microsoft introduced the Windows operating system, which used the same metaphors as the Macintosh. It became the standard operating system for the personal computer market. Right: The fi rst personal computer prototype, the Xerox Alto, 1973. Below: The Lisa, made by Apple Computers, 1983, was the fi rst personal computer available to the consumer that featured a detachable keyboard, mouse and Graphical User Interface. Bottom: The Microsoft Windows 3.0 Graphical User Interface, 1990. Copyright @ 2014. Laurence King Publishing. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/18/2019 1:44 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES AN: 926193 ; Coates, Kathryn, Ellison, Andy.; An Introduction to Information Design Account: undeloan.main.ehost18 Chapter 1 The multi-touch screen revolution A touch screen is an electronic display that is sensitive to the touch of a stylus or fi nger within the display area. E.A. Johnson of the Royal Radar Establishment in the UK is credited with the invention of the fi rst touch screen in 1965. The touch screen enables the user to interact with the display directly without the need for a mouse or touchpad. Today, touch screens are widely used with digital appliances such as mobile phones, satellite navigation devices and video games. Multi-touch technology allows the device to recognize two or more points of contact with the screen. When an object or fi nger touches the surface, sensors detect the disruption of an electrical fi eld. This information is relayed to the software, which responds to the gesture accordingly. This technology has allowed designers to develop more intuitive and gesturedriven interfaces for handheld electronic devices such as the mobile phone. Interactive designer Mike Matas from the USA has commented, ‘If you want to do something (on a computer) you should just be able to reach out your hand and do it, no buttons and no computer interface required.’ Using a multi-touch screen on an Apple iPad. Many companies utilize multi-touch screen technology for their smartphones and tablets. Devices such as the Apple iPhone and iPad were designed to be used with a fi nger, so you control everything with a tap, drag, swipe, pinch, fl ick or twist of the fi ngers. Even seemingly complicated tasks can be completed with these simple gestures. These interfaces are now becoming commonplace, with many PCs using the system too. This technology has allowed electronic devices and interfaces to become more accessible and instinctive. They rely less on complicated menus and keyboards and as a result use fewer moving parts. Copyright @ 2014. Laurence King Publishing. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/18/2019 1:44 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES AN: 926193 ; Coates, Kathryn, Ellison, Andy.; An Introduction to Information Design Account: undeloan.main.ehostWhat is information design? 19 Why is information design necessary? Information plays a large part in our daily lives. We are surrounded by information all the time, from the remote control for our TV to the interface on our mobile phone and the webpage we view. We take it for granted, but someone had to design the way in which it is visually presented. Try to imagine a world where information design didn’t exist. Taking a simple bus or rail journey would be quite diffi cult without it. How would you know which bus or train to catch, where to catch it and what time it departed or arrived at its destination? How would the driver know where he was going without the use of directional road signs? How would you know when to turn and in which direction? Even simple decisions when driving such as when to stop at a junction would be diffi cult without the traffi c-light system. Crossing a busy road could prove diffi cult without simple aids such as the pedestrian crossing. Below: The UK road and motorway signage system was designed 1957–1967 by Jock Kinneir and Margaret Calvert. It has since been adopted around the world, for example at Umm Suqeim, Dubai, UAE (bottom). Pedestrian crossing light from the former German Democratic Republic. Copyright @ 2014. Laurence King Publishing. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/18/2019 1:44 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES AN: 926193 ; Coates, Kathryn, Ellison, Andy.; An Introduction to Information Design Account: undeloan.main.ehost20 Chapter 1 Simple inventions like warning symbols and colourcoding allow users to navigate and use machines safely. They provide guidelines that everyone can follow, even if you are unfamiliar with the environment or the equipment being used. Clear instructions are given on what (or what not) to do. Consider travelling to a foreign country where your native language is not spoken. At the airport, how do you know where to fi nd the departure gate or retrieve Above: Signage in two languages at Hong Kong airport. Right: The Periodic Table. your luggage? How do you fi nd the taxi rank or bureau de change? All these dilemmas are solved via information design. It provides clear instructions, facts or data to an audience in a visual language that can transcend international boundaries and bring people together. It helps us to learn complex information, such as the Periodic Table. It can make the complicated very simple and can save time and eff ort in the transmission. Copyright @ 2014. Laurence King Publishing. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/18/2019 1:44 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES AN: 926193 ; Coates, Kathryn, Ellison, Andy.; An Introduction to Information Design Account: undeloan.main.ehost8 © Inter IKEA Systems B.V. 2002 AA-65112-6 ANSSI What is information design? 21 What are the diff erent types of information design? Information design takes many forms. We break them down into three main categories: print, interactive (including screen-based design), and environmental. These three categories also overlap, as various types of information frequently appear in one or more category. This is not a defi nitive list and some people may use other categorizations. Each category takes a diff erent approach to the presentation of data, to which we will draw attention. Print-based information design If you were asked to give an example of print-based design, what would it be? Something from a textbook at school; a biological diagram of an eye, perhaps? Information is presented to us all the time, and in a variety of ways; we often just don’t consider or realize it. Information design is not just the sexy pieces of data visualization we see in graphic design books, it is Above: Anatomical diagram of an eye. Right: Assembly instructions for the IKEA ANSSI barstool. also the everyday instances that we take for granted. Consider the utility bill that tells you how much electricity you have used, or the instructional diagrams that come with fl at-pack furniture. Information is everywhere, and we are not always aware of how much thought has gone into its visualization. Information in print relies on a single image or sequence of images to convey complex sets of data. It not only uses diagrams or charts, but can also use photography, illustration and text to communicate, for example, a newspaper or magazine article. It is static and the reader is passive in the transmission of the material. The user does not interact with it in any way other than to decode the visual data presented to gain the facts or fi gures more quickly than by reading long passages of explanatory text. The complexity of the data has to be considered; an audience may struggle if too much information is presented in one piece. Navigating the information is necessary; unlike interactive information design, where the user can isolate particular sets of data, print presents all the information together. This may mean that a key (sometimes called a legend), such as colourcoding or symbolic pictograms, is required to be able to decipher the material. An example of this is the Copyright @ 2014. Laurence King Publishing. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/18/2019 1:44 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES AN: 926193 ; Coates, Kathryn, Ellison, Andy.; An Introduction to Information Design Account: undeloan.main.ehost22 Chapter 1 2010 UK election map designed by Mark Bryson, which shows via colour-coding the number of votes cast for diff erent political parties across the UK. If done correctly, information design can modify people’s behaviour. In an age when we are all concerned about the amount of energy we consume, simple graphics such as that of an energy-effi ciency chart allow a user to judge a rating immediately. In 2009 Robert Cialdini, a social psychologist at Arizona State University, conducted a study in conjunction with the Sacramento Municipal Utility District. 35,000 randomly selected homes were chosen to receive a new style of utility statement. These rated consumers on their energy use by comparing them to their neighbours. Consumers received two smiley faces for very effi cient energy use, one smiley face for good, and frowns for using too much energy. After a six-month period, Cialdini found that the customers who received the personalized statement reduced their energy use by 2 per cent more than those who received the standard statements. Above: Mark Bryson’s map for The Guardian newspaper showing results for the 2010 UK general election. Below: The Sacramento Municipal Utility District bill, designed by Opower, details the addressee’s energy usage in relation to that of their neighbours via graphical content. Copyright @ 2014. Laurence King Publishing. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/18/2019 1:44 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES AN: 926193 ; Coates, Kathryn, Ellison, Andy.; An Introduction to Information Design Account: undeloan.main.ehostWhat is information design? 23 This Virgin Media television interface displays the programme schedule alongside icons showing what is set to be recorded and which programmes can be accessed via catch-up services. Interface for the 4AD website, designed by Paul Farrington of Studio Tonne. The user selects a year and an artist on the wheel to navigate to the appropriate page of the site. Interactive information design The computer and the internet have revolutionized how we receive and interact with data. Interactive information design requires a very diff erent approach than print. Since the user is active in making choices, those choices need to be considered and presented. It is not a case of presenting a static image on screen. The user needs to be involved or immersed in the information. This often involves fi ltering data to show particular facts, fi gures or statistics. The user selects the criteria by which the data or information is measured or compared. The navigation of this information is very important: the options available have to be clear and should lead to some meaningful resolution. Think about the interface of your cable or terrestrial TV supplier. The choice of programming has to be presented clearly. What is showing at the moment? What will be next? Can I set a reminder to watch a transmission? How do I record a particular programme at a certain time? Decisions have to be made by the user. There should be no ambiguity or uncertainty as to the on-screen navigation and instructions. Since information is divorced from the page, the designer can employ sound and moving images as part of the experience. The user is no longer passive. Paul Farrington of Studio Tonne in the UK has created website interfaces for numerous clients, including the navigational interface for record label 4AD’s e-commerce site. The navigational tool had to enable the user to search quickly through the label’s 25-year back catalogue as well as searching via artist. The decisions made on the tool took the user to specifi c pages within the site. Copyright @ 2014. Laurence King Publishing. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/18/2019 1:44 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES AN: 926193 ; Coates, Kathryn, Ellison, Andy.; An Introduction to Information Design Account: undeloan.main.ehost24 Chapter 1 To illustrate how interactive information design diff ers from print, try comparing the experience of reading a magazine in print form with a multi-media tablet such as an iPad. The iPad application incorporates sound and moving imagery as part of the user experience. It shows behind-the-scenes video features in real time as opposed to static imagery. The capabilities of an interactive solution allow users to explore content in a variety of ways. Depending on the content, it can be preferable to guide the user through set pathways or allow them to meander through at their leisure. The ability to navigate and Examples of interactive information design include reading a magazine on an iPad (left) and using an in-car navigation system (above). make decisions about what and how we view has placed more responsibility on the designer to make the transmission of information easier and clearer. The choices made can separate out data and make distinctions or comparisons more apparent. We now have information designers who call themselves user experience designers; they understand the diff erence between telling people about features of a product or service and letting them experience the benefi ts for themselves. The user experience is explored in more detail in Chapter 2. Copyright @ 2014. Laurence King Publishing. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/18/2019 1:44 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES AN: 926193 ; Coates, Kathryn, Ellison, Andy.; An Introduction to Information Design Account: undeloan.main.ehostWhat is information design? 25 The challenge with exhibition design is how you communicate imp ortant facts or data to a large audience in a specifi c site. The material presented will have to be at a larger scale, but it is not simply a case of making everything bigger. The designer may have to think about the distance from which a project is viewed, where it is positioned, even the ambient lighting conditions within that physical environment to ensure that it is legible. It is possible to use multiple platforms to communicate, choosing print for some elements and interactive for others. This may depend on the amount of detail required and how the presentation of the information aids comprehension. For example, a piece about kinetic energy will use movement to tell the audience about it. The main thing to consider with environmental information design is visibility and context. Environmental information design Signage is probably the fi rst thing most people think of when talking about environmental information design, although wayfi nding, exhibition design and large-scale installations could also be included in this category. American urban planner Kevin Lynch fi rst used the term ‘wayfi nding’ in his 1960 book Image of the City. He used it to describe navigating through a physical environment using visual cues to orient oneself. This can incorporate signage along with lighting and three-dimensional objects. The function of wayfi nding is to inform an audience of where they need to go, how to fi nd it and what to do once they have arrived. The designer must be aware of the physical limitations of an environment and of the needs of the user. They may have to analyze the space and make informed choices based on how real people use the area. A good example of wayfi nding and signage in practice is provided in the case study at the Design Museum Holon, Tel Aviv, in Chapter 7. Copyright @ 2014. Laurence King Publishing. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/18/2019 1:44 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES AN: 926193 ; Coates, Kathryn, Ellison, Andy.; An Introduction to Information Design Account: undeloan.main.ehost