THE INFORMATION SOCIETY
2016, VOL. 32, NO. 5, 333–342
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01972243.2016.1212618

Racial/ethnic identity, community-oriented media initiatives, and transmedia
storytelling
Srividya Ramasubramanian
Department of Communication, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas, USA

ABSTRACT

ARTICLE HISTORY

This study focuses on how racial minorities are actively adapting, resisting, and challenging the
practices of mainstream media in a convergence era. Through collaborative, community-based,
transmedia storytelling initiatives, racial minority groups are fostering new critical media literacies
and active digital citizenship. This article focuses on two such initiatives: a ﬁctional Web-based
drama series (East Los High) and a transmedia participatory art initiative (Question Bridge). The
analysis shows how racial minorities use transmedia projects to create alternative forms of
mediated storytelling that are more inclusive and participatory.

Received 18 September 2014
Accepted 12 April 2016

Transmedia storytelling is a complex aggregation of narrative ﬁction that synthesizes elements from multiple
media formats (Jenkins 2006; Scolari 2013; Singhal,
Wang, and Rogers 2012). Unlike multiplatform crosspromotional storytelling, transmedia content uses multiple storylines that are individually complete, but with
each containing a thread that contributes to the creation
of an overarching ﬁctional world. Transmedia content
has mainly been the province of multinational global
brands in commercial contexts, such as Barbie, Hollywood productions such as Batman and The Matrix, and
video games such as Assassin’s Creed. Here the target
audiences follow the narrative across diverse media platforms by using social networking sites such as Facebook,
Twitter, and Instagram in conjunction with ﬁlms, video
games, books, and other media.
Multinational media corporations and global transmedia
franchises are accelerating homogenization of mainstream
media content (such as Angrybirds, 24, Lost, Harry Potter,
Barbie, and most Disney/Marvel stories) in ways that privilege the neoliberal capitalistic logic (Mirlees 2013; Wasko
and Meehan 2013). Even as top-down approaches of multinational media corporations lead to constraints on those
who do or do not feel a “belonging,” marginalized groups
are using bottom-up approaches toward afﬁrming identities as active digital citizens (Jenkins, Ford, and Green
2013; Scolari 2014). They are acquiring, honing, and sharing new digital multimodal media literacies to effectively
assert identity in a rapidly changing multicultural,

CONTACT Srividya Ramasubramanian
Station, TX 77843, USA.

srivi@tamu.edu

Published with license by Taylor & Francis. © Srividya Ramasubramanian

KEYWORDS

Case studies; community
initiatives; media literacies;
race/ethnicity; transmedia
storytelling

transnational media environment (Christian 2011; Coppa
2008). Transmedia advocacy projects, which are often
global partnerships, use creative ways to nurture transformative spaces that provide opportunities for meaningful
intergroup conversation (Correa and Jeong 2011; Hargattai
and Walejko 2008).
This study examines transmedia strategies used by
racially/ethnically minoritized communities to negotiate,
respond to, and challenge stereotypic, mainstream portrayals in U.S. contexts. Prior studies have typically
focused on how minority members cope with media stereotypes of their group through individual strategies such
as creating alternative fan ﬁction (Coppa 2008) and digital protests through hashtags in Twitter (Bonilla and
Rosa 2015). This study, on the other hand, focuses on
community-level resistance to media stereotypes that
build alternative spheres of inﬂuence. It does so via an
in-depth examination of two initiatives to create alternative forms of mediated storytelling that are more inclusive and participatory: a ﬁctional Web-based drama
series (East Los High) and a transmedia participatory art
initiative (Question Bridge). Analyses of their websites
and social networking sites, conducted from August
2013 to August 2014, provided primary data. Secondary
data come from interviews, news articles, and videos,
available in the public domain, relating to these projects.
The next three sections provide overviews of literatures on symbolic annihilation, new media literacies, and
grassroots resistance. The subsequent sections provide

Department of Communication, Texas A&M University, 202D Bolton Hall, Mail Stop 4234, College

334

S. RAMASUBRAMANIAN

case studies of East Los High and Question Bridge. The
last two sections discuss the ﬁndings and offer concluding thoughts.

Symbolic annihilation and group vitality
Racially/ethnically minoritized groups have had historic
disadvantage in the United States, economically, politically, culturally, and technologically. The perspective of
symbolic annihilation suggests that social groups with
less inﬂuence are underrepresented, trivialized,
demeaned, and ridiculed in the media (Tuchman 1978;
Gerbner 1972; Gerbner and Gross 1976). By consistently
failing to represent minoritized groups, the mainstream
White media present a biased social reality that excludes
the voices of those at the margin. Analytical studies of
content of mainstream media document that portrayals
of racially/ethnically minoritized groups are routinely
negative: criminal, dangerous, lazy, and unintelligent
(Aoki and Mio 2009; Bogle 2001; Daniels 2012; Dixon
and Linz 2000; Entman and Rojecki 2001; Gray 2005;
Mastro and Robinson 2000).
The expansion of multicultural societies and the increase
of global migration have led to rising ethnic, minority,
diasporic, and immigrant media (Georgiou 2005; Shome
and Hedge 2002; Appadurai 2011). Research suggests that
members of such racially/ethnically minoritized groups are
often highly conscious of how their groups are depicted in
media (Appiah 2001; 2002; Fujioka 2005). Not surprisingly,
minorities prefer media content produced by and featuring
members of their own particular cultural in-group. For
example, a survey from an alliance of ethnic news media
in the United States suggests that 45% of ethnic minorities
prefer ethnic television, radio, and newspapers compared
to mainstream counterparts (New California Media 2005).
According to the perspective of group-vitality theory, when
members of minority groups view content concerning their
group, especially positive portrayals, there is an increase in
subjective assessment of the group’s relative position in
society in terms of power, prestige, resources, and inﬂuence, indirectly increasing collective esteem (Abrams, Eveland, and Giles 2003; Giles, Bourhis, and Taylor 1977).
Although early Internet scholars projected that online
spaces would be more democratic and inclusive than traditional mainstream media, this has not necessarily
occurred. Racism is rampant in online contexts, with
Twitter alone accounting for more than 10,000 tweets
with slurs every day, a phenomenon known as “twacism”
(Daniels 2009; Hughey and Daniels 2013; Nakamura
2009; Nakamura 2013; Perry and Olsson 2009). Given
this context, attending to the voices of ethnically/racially
minoritized groups for better representation in media is
important.

Active digital citizenship and critical new
media literacies
Digital citizenship refers to the ability of individuals to use
digital technologies to allow full participation in society.
Active digital citizenship is the process that permits the
potential for fulﬁllment through creative expression, political participation, economic actualization, and civic engagement (Harcup 2011; Mossberger, Tolbert, and Stansbury
2003; Mouffe 1992). Going beyond access to informational
technology, new media literacies focus on overcoming the
“participation gap,” allowing individuals to fully engage in
active digital citizenship and a participatory culture (Jenkins 2006). Critical new media education attempts to create
safe spaces for alternative public discourses, use of digital
tools to amplify the voices of marginalized groups, foster
support for indigenous transmedia artists, and educate a
broader audience of the diversity within a community
(Burgess 2006; Ohler 2013).
Studies on the information divide show that those
already in advantaged positions in society beneﬁt at a
much faster rate from new media technologies than
those with initially less resources (Cleary, Pierce, and
Trauth 2006; Hoffman, Novak, and Schlosser 2001;
Mossberger et al. 2003; Spooner and Rainie 2000). African Americans, especially those in lower income neighborhoods, have lesser access to the Internet and home
broadband (Cleary, Pierce, and Trauth 2006; Mossberger, Kaplan, and Gilbert 2008; Pew Internet and
American Life Project 2014). In contrast, mobile phone
ownership and usage on smartphones of Web-based features such as Twitter are either on par or rank higher
among Blacks and Latinos than among Whites in the
United States (Pew Internet and American Life Project
2014). Middle school African-American females are
among the most frequent users of Internet and mobile
phones for text messaging, downloading music, and
online searches (Jackson et al. 2008). African-American
males lag females for online activities except video
gaming.
Recent studies show that although the digital information gap continues to exist, among those with online
access, users from racial/ethnic minority groups are
more likely than Caucasian-American users to be content creators who engage in producing, posting, and
sharing ﬁles online (Harp et al. 2012; Jones et al. 2009;
Lenhart and Horrigan 2003; Correa and Jeong 2011).
The former also have more positive attitudes toward
technology compared to Caucasians (Mossberger et al.
2003), and are active participants who start blogs, post
on social networking sites, create online citizen journalism, and upload photos/videos. Hargittai and Walejko
(2008) found that among ﬁrst-year U.S. students in their

THE INFORMATION SOCIETY

sample, African Americans and Native Americans were
more likely to write online (including poetry and creative
ﬁction) compared to other groups, while African Americans were less likely than other racial groups to produce
ﬁlms and artistic photography.

Culturally sensitive entertainment and
grassroots digital resistance
Members of racially/ethnically minoritized groups use
participatory convergence culture to challenge traditional racist representations by offering an alternate
more progressive political agenda that caters to multiracial and diverse audiences. As audience members, they
often share conﬂicted relationships with mainstream ﬁctional narratives (Gray 2005). While they might engage
actively with these mainstream texts, they also observe
that minorities are positioned in the margins as incidental and background characters, not allowing central participation. They are critical of the corporate practices of
mainstream media, including preferential treatment
given to Caucasian actors and the lack of diversity
among scriptwriters. Some of the marginalized gain
motivation to produce and distribute alternative cultural
productions that are more inclusive (Coppa 2008).
Creative production of alternative Web-based ﬁctional entertainment that is more progressive than typical mainstream ﬁction is one such strategy. New digital
media technologies offer many low-tech, low budget
options to produce and distribute independently produced, ethnically relevant counternarratives (Christian
2011). Since the mid 2000s, Web series have become
popular with many independent ﬁlmmakers as they
attract larger and more devoted audiences than YouTube
viral videos and cost signiﬁcantly less to produce, compared to mainstream television shows. In order to compete with extremely aggressive market forces,
independent Web ﬁlmmakers often clone formulaic narratives and marketing strategies from the media industry
but use more diverse forms of representation and ﬂexible
production techniques that leverage the power of new
media technologies and convergence to reach to racially
and sexually diverse audiences (Christian 2011).

Alternative transmedia ﬁction, entertainmenteducation, and East Los High
Geo-ethnic storytelling refers to stories that are culturally
relevant to particular ethnic groups within the context of
a geographically bound community (Kim and BallRokeach 2006; Lin and Song 2006). Geo-ethnic storytelling has primarily been applied to the study of local news
oriented toward speciﬁc ethnic communities. For

335

example, the Metamorphosis project conducted by Sandra Ball-Rokeach and colleagues at the University of
Southern California discusses neighborhood storytelling
networks in the context of community news media (Kim
and Ball-Rokeach 2006). However, arguably in this
study, geo-ethnic transmedia storytelling is not only
related to news or print-oriented media but can engage
multiple media types to present ethnically relevant stories relating to speciﬁc communities.
East Los High (ELH) is an example of an educational
geo-ethnic transmedia storytelling project employing
culturally relevant ﬁctional narratives targeted at a speciﬁc racial/ethnic minority group (see www.eastloshigh.
com). ELH is the ﬁrst English-language telenovela in the
United States with an all-Latino cast to serve the Hispanic population, one of the most rapidly growing
minority groups in the United States. This population
has a higher degree of television viewing than non-Hispanics and also represents over 75% of audiences watching both Spanish and English programs (Pi~
n
on and
Rojas 2011; Valdivia 2010). Given speciﬁc emphasis on
East Los Angeles as a focused geographic area and on the
speciﬁc ethnic community of Latino-Americans, this
series illustrates geo-ethnic storytelling.
ELH is a teen-oriented drama of a ﬁctional high
school setting in Los Angeles and is in its third season.
The main programming is distributed via Hulu, a free
online service, to audiences in the form of a Web series.
ELH was one of top ﬁve programs in the ﬁrst month of
their release. Moreover, its episodes have consistently
been one of the most watched on Hulu’s original programming fare (Block 2013). ELH receives more than
1 million visitors every month (Terrero 2014) and is the
number one program on Hulu Latino (K. Le Banks, personal communication, February 3, 2014). Here it is
important to note that ELH did not have typical Hollywood ﬁnance. It was ﬁnanced by private investors committed to support of media that have social value and by
the Population Media Center, an international nongovernmental organization (NGO) that focuses on social
change through entertainment-education (Rivera 2013).
Storylines are similar to mainstream ﬁction: a teenaged high school with romance, drama, conﬂict, culture
of “hook-ups,” gossip, and more. Actors are not stars but
talented newcomers. ELH uses the typical telenovela formula of sex, violence, and revenge, but with an underlying moral message. It uses the Sabido Method of
entertainment-education, inspired by Migual Sabido’s
use of telenovelas for social change in Mexico (Sabido
2004; Singhal and Rogers 2002). Sabido adapted Albert
Bandura’s social learning theory to create role models in
entertainment media for inducing social change (Bandura 1977; 1997). In effect, entertainment-education

336

S. RAMASUBRAMANIAN

entails deliberate, purposeful placement of educational
messages in entertaining programs. Sabido’s success has
inspired adoption of entertainment-education strategy
by governments, NGOs, and other organizations in other
countries, including Soul City in South Africa, Hum Log
in India, and Karate Kids in Canada (Singhal and Rogers
2002).
Unlike other entertainment-educational efforts, ELH
offers a transmedia storytelling experience. It is one of
the ﬁrst transmedia entertainment projects focused on
promoting health, community development, and social
impact. From the original 7-minute Web-based episodes,
ELH production evolved into half-hour episodes for teleseries on Hulu, as opposed to a series on traditional network or cable television. Thus, it is accessible over mobile
phones to even low-income teens in East Los Angeles
(East L.A.).
ELH uses audio, visual, and digital media on Facebook, Twitter, and other Web-based platforms to create
a ﬁctional world (see Table 1 for a full list of transmedia
elements). One of the characters, Ceci, has a video log
online that discusses experiences as a teen mom. Siren is
a ﬁctional online high school newspaper that features
tidbits, gossip, an interactive advice column, and interviews with characters. A geo-mapping mobile app enables tracking of local community resources and
personalized recipes. “Dance Five” allows users to take
free dance lessons and also follow the latest fashion and
music trends in East Los Angeles. Apart from the main
episode, another production unit records additional footage, which is supplemental and behind-the-scenes video
(Hall 2014).
Many of the features on ELH’s website are interactive,
allowing “real-time” interaction between fans and characters. Comments and suggestions from the fans feed
into the story development process, making fans both
consumers and producers. For instance, one fan
responded to a character facing a tough challenge with
the comment, “Don’t let anyone undervalue you. You
are smart beautiful and have a huge heart.” Another
Table 1. List of transmedia elements used by East Los High and
Question Bridge.
East Los High

1. Televised episodes
2. Supplemental audiovisual
materials and footage
3. Social networking sites (Twitter, Facebook, Instagram)
4. Mobile apps
5. Website
6. Blogs (fashion, food, dance,
etc.)
7. Music downloads

Question Bridge

1. Video-based questionand-answer dialogue
2. Art museum installations
3. Social networking sites
(Facebook and Twitter)
4. Mobile apps
5. Live public discussions
6. Online discussion forum
7. Educational kits

viewer commented on a post regarding Latino stereotypes, “When I was 18 and (sic) ignorant white man
asked me why I hadn’t had a baby yet.” The blogs and
website have new updated content every day so that ELH
becomes integrated into fans’ everyday media rituals and
habits. Furthermore, after every episode, audiences are
encouraged to explore the website for resources on issues
raised in that particular episode, including legal aid
counseling, domestic violence, and health.
Striking a balance between popularity and education
is a particularly difﬁcult challenge for transmedia entertainment-educational initiatives. Charlotte High, responsible for development of Hulu Originals, states that the
show has a “cool, contemporary feel” and yet focuses on
issues such as “domestic abuse, coming out as gay in
high school, and bullying” (James 2014, online). The
content is not simply preachy or didactic in nature. Prior
research on public service announcements (PSAs), especially on teen-oriented media content, demonstrates that
messages seen as overly authoritative can produce a boomerang effect, leading audiences to behave in opposition
to the intended message (Byrne 2009; Fishbein et al.
2002). The ELH production team was particular about
avoiding this oppositional boomerang effect. Mark Warshaw, who helped with the transmedia aspects of ELH,
stated, “We hit that nice middle level where it didn’t feel
like a PSA” (Block 2013, online).
The series is not without controversy or its critics.
Director Carlos Portugal has said that he was particular
that the script should counter the idea that East Los
Angeles is a violence-ridden dangerous zone by presenting the characters as warm and diverse (Castro 2013).
However, critical voices from within the Latino L.A.
community argue that the characters are far from being
portrayed as complex (Ortiz 2013). They point to the
unidimensional portrayals of some characters as sexually
promiscuous teens, violent gang members, and criminal
drug dealers. While the executive producer of ELH, Katie
Elmora Mota, agrees that the show does not represent
the entire spectrum of diversity of nationalities and cultures within the Latino community, she suggests that
ELH offers a fresh perspective on Latino culture (Rivera
2013). Critics also question the authenticity of the series
in terms of the absence of the typical East L.A. accent
and multiethnic, diverse musical scene (Ortiz 2013).
Another point of discussion among viewers has been
the anti-choice response to the series, raising the question of whether or not teen pregnancy prevention is a
socially positive goal. More socially conservative organizations that promote abstinence and anti-choice attitudes criticize ELH for promoting negative sexual
attitudes such as sexual promiscuity rather than abstinence. Some of the news stories that were analyzed for

THE INFORMATION SOCIETY

this study carried explicit messages that urged citizens to
contact Hulu and request cancelation of the show’s subsequent season. Consequently, ELH engenders important
questions such as what is “social good” and who decides
what is best for a community in designing entertainment-education transmedia initiatives.
In sum, ELH is a community-oriented transmedia
entertainment-education project that uses the power of
ﬁctional narratives to redeﬁne East L.A. Latino teenagers
through a geo-ethnic storytelling initiative that caters to
a speciﬁc audience of Latino-Americans conﬁned to a
narrow geographic area. The project strategically
involves community organizations through partnerships
that target speciﬁc community-relevant and culturally
sensitive messaging. By using transmedia narratives, the
series appeals to the targeted teen audience that is techsavvy and participates actively in digital media. Due to
these factors, ELH has accumulated a large audience and
is now renewed for a third season.
While ELH uses ﬁctional drama to reach ethnically/
racially minoritized communities, the following case
study of Question Bridge uses transmediated dialogue
and public participatory art for renegotiating ethnic/
racial identities.

Participatory transmedia public art,
counternarratives, and Question Bridge
Content-analytic studies of media representations of
Black males provide ample evidence of biased and stereotypical portrayals in news and entertainment media.
Representations of Black male characters in entertainment depict them as lazy and unintelligent individuals
(Burgess et al. 2011; Mastro and Greenberg 2000) and
overrepresent them as criminals in the news (Dixon and
Linz 2000; Entman and Rojecki 2001; Mastro, Blecha
and Atwelle Seate 2011). Research shows that exposure
to counter-stereotypic African-American media celebrities leads to prejudice reduction and greater support for
race-targeted policies such as afﬁrmative action (Ramasubramanian 2011). However, given the proﬁt orientation of mainstream multinational media corporations,
little commitment exists for presenting complex and
diverse Black masculine identities through media. This
gap is ﬁlled by Question Bridge, a community-oriented
transmedia project that uses video-based question-andanswer dialogic exchanges to renegotiate Black male
identity.
Question Bridge originally began in 1996 when Chris
Jordan was invited by the San Diego Museum of Photographic Arts to create a project on race. This experimental project showcased interviews with Black Americans
to highlight how views about Blackness from within the

337

racial group are different from those outside. It was
revived in 2012 when Hank Willis Thomas found an old
VHS tape of the project and relaunched the project in
collaboration with Chris Johnson as Question Bridge.
Other members of the core group include Bayete Ross
Smith, Kamal Sinclair, and more than a dozen academics, artists, and producers. This project, produced by
Songha & Company, has transmedia support from Antonio Kaplan and Elise Baugh of Innovent. Other supporters include Tribeca Film Institute, the Sundance
Institute’s New Frontier Story Lab, The Ford Foundation, and the Bay Area Video Coalition. Question Bridge
has toured through New York, Georgia, California, and
Utah, in prisons, art museums, and educational institutions. It includes more than 1500 interviews recorded
during 4 years (see http://beta.questionbridge.com).
Question Bridge is a multichannel videographic production using several media platforms to share the
multi-dimensional, complex, and ﬂuid identities of Black
men. As an educational project, it uses integrated transmedia elements such as video, social networking sites,
mobile apps, and face-to-face discussions to engage audiences in multiple ways (see Table 1 for a full list). This
innovative transmedia project also incorporates Webbased media sculptural environments, geo-location hotspots, live public discussions, virtual street teams, and
online forums that transcend traditional videographic
productions. The curriculum, available to high schools,
also appears at such venues as the Brooklyn Museum,
which offers visitors iPads, on site, to explore the online
tools while also being physically present.
Question Bridge is collaborative in nature and creates
an “identity map” using self-generated identity tags
within various groups of Black males. Compiling this
information and presenting it using visual mapping illustrates the dynamic identities of Black men in an interesting and unique manner. The recent “beta” version of the
online website allows tagging videos according to various
themes (such as love, family, or education), ﬂagging as
inappropriate, sharing through social networking sites
such as Twitter and Facebook, and responding with individuals’ chosen videos. These features make Question
Bridge not only transmediated but also audience centered and actively participatory. Posted videos and
responses allow audiences to choose any theme, speciﬁc
individual, or response to navigate through the database
of interlinked videos.
Rather than follow the linear sequential logic of traditional media such as television or ﬁlm, Question Bridge
allows personalized and interactive selection of content.
Those visiting the site monitor the posted videos and
unedited responses. The artists neither set an agenda nor
gatekeep what information is allowed into this virtual

338

S. RAMASUBRAMANIAN

space; the community manages both functions. For
instance, the production team does not select questions,
which participants choose. Another unique feature is
that interviewees and interviewers may switch roles, creating a more egalitarian conversational model than
mass-mediated performances. The overall effect is
stream-of-consciousness, interactive dialogical communication concerning emergent issues. An interactive
open forum discussion with a Black male celebrity such
as English actor Delroy Lindo often accompanies the
video-art installations at museums, thereby adding a
“live” component to the otherwise mediated experience.
Although Question Bridge has many user-driven elements, some of its aspects suggest that the project is highly
curated and intentional. The lead artist of this project,
Johnson, states that the creation of the project had the speciﬁc purpose of bringing together Black-American males,
otherwise divided by social class, geography, education,
and occupation. The intention is to subtly transform the
male Black consciousness through the process of freely asking questions that are central to minds and hearts, and left
unanswered because of the taboo of discussing sensitive
topics (Belcher 2014, online). In the original 1996 project
in California, Johnson conducted video interviews which
asked Black interviewees to respond to the following speciﬁc question: “If you were to ask this black person—who
lives a very different lifestyle—a question, what would it
be?” (Belcher 2014, online).
One of the objectives of the original Question Bridge
project was to span the divide between professional suburban Blacks and denizens of urban Black neighborhoods through the process of critical questioning and
reﬂective responses. In Johnson’s words, the project
sought to “heal the divide” between “those whose lives
were focused on the neighbourhood” and “those whose
lives were focused on the greater white world” (King
2012, online). For instance, Johnson says that some questions from the suburban Blacks would be: “Why do you
live in the ‘hood’? Why don’t you work hard and leave?”
when those Blacks from such neighborhoods would ask
questions such as “Do you really think you can escape
racism by moving out of the ‘hood’?” (Belcher 2014,
online).
While the objective of the original project was to dissolve the barriers between professional suburban Blacks
versus working-class inner-city Blacks in California, the
contemporary project has at least two sets of public
forums for communication: an internal audience of
Black males and an external audience of others, especially among the dominant group of White Americans.
By fostering a safe space for a media-generated dialogue
for Black men from various educational, geographic,
generational, education, and occupational backgrounds,

the project serves as a safe space for Black males themselves to openly share personal stories and unique perspectives on various aspects of everyday life.
For internal audiences, a project like Question Bridge
provides digital tools for self-reﬂection and identity
reconstruction with the intent of facilitating the sharing
of intimate experiences, stronger community bonds,
healing dialogues, and genuine empathetic listening. The
speciﬁc procedure involves a Black man asking a relevant
question about another group of Black men from whom
he feels socially distanced. In response, at least one Black
man from the latter group answers via a video recording,
tagged with the video containing the question. Queries
range in topics from the existential, spiritual, moral, and
ethical, including courage, freedom, family responsibilities, sexuality, and authenticity: “What do Black males
have in common?” “What is your purpose?” “When do
you know when you become a man?” “How can I be
good when I am surrounded by evil?”
For external audiences, the focus is on shattering
existing deep-rooted cultural stereotypes by exposing
them to the multifaceted, complex, and diverse identities
among Black males. Since the exhibits include videos
from a rich variety of backgrounds discussing deeply personal issues with poignancy and humor, a window creates an appreciation of diversity and also the degree of
articulation among Black males (King 2012). Many
implicit and explicit racial prejudices exist as those harbored by Americans in general that lead to discrimination and serve as barriers to positive intergroup
relations. Question Bridge speciﬁcally cites social science
data that suggests exposure to counterstereotypes is
effective for overcoming simplistic, limited understandings of out-groups, especially in the context of a so-called
“postracial era” in which race is, apparently, insigniﬁcant
and inconsequential.
One of the directors of Question Bridge, Williams,
uses rich metaphors to explain the objective: “It’s like
giving outsiders a window into the nature of Black consciousness,” and “You become a ‘privileged witness’ to
an internal dialogue that Black men have with themselves rarely” (King 2012, online). The emphasis is much
more on Blackness than on masculinity. The White audience members’ reversed role is antithetical to the traditional superﬁcial engagement of mainstream media with
Blackness. While the emphasis of this project is on Black
males themselves, the artists hope that engaging with
their project will beneﬁt all participants by making them
reconsider closed beliefs and limited views of other
cultures.
Unlike commercial entertainment videos or storylines, Question Bridge takes a rather raw and uncensored
approach to discussing the multifaceted identities of

THE INFORMATION SOCIETY

Black males. In this respect, the approach is very different from East Los High, which uses dramatic content
and a telenovela formula to deliver the educational/social
message. Question Bridge has no actors, no music, no
special effects, and not even editing that could engender
typical media representations of Black males. In this
sense Question Bridge claims to be more “real” and
“authentic” than a project such as ELH.
Audiences’ reactions, which Johnson describes as
“overwhelmingly positive,” align with the expectations of
the production team (King 2012). For instance, at the
Brooklyn Museum, “at least a hundred people” perused
the exhibits for at least half an hour, laughing at times
but reﬂecting in silence for the most part (King 2012).
These reactions show that the project discusses topics
otherwise difﬁcult and challenging for open conversations. Johnson says that “beyond the sanctity of the
neighbourhood barbershop, there aren’t many places
black men hold open and truthful discussions. But even
in this hallowed space, some issues can’t be thoroughly
discussed in the time it takes to get a haircut or a beard
trimmed” (Belcher 2014, online). Johnson acknowledges
that while a project such as this one tries to open a space
for changing the identity of Black males, a long-term
effort is necessary because major social change cannot be
a reasonable expectation in the short run.
Some critics express apprehension: “airing dirty laundry in public” (Belcher 2014). They question whether a
project such as Question Bridge is strategically sound,
given its objective of countering negative stereotypes of
African-Americans. From the artists’ perspective, an
honest and transparent conversation, even if it is initially
awkward and uncomfortable, will eventually lead to
greater mutual trust. The underlying assumption is that
when talking with one another, at a personal level, with
honesty, prejudice toward the other declines. Hank Willis Thomas summarizes the choice of video-mediated
conversations: “I saw the magic of using video as a way
to mediate this conversation where people actually are
really listening to the questions instead of just having a
knee-jerk response” (King 2012, online). Because this
dialogue is public and interactive, the project has become
a sociological and community-based experience of the
collective Black male consciousness.
Overall, Question Bridge represents a community-centered educational initiative that uses the power of transmedia storytelling to create a safe haven for Black males to
have candid conversations with those similar and those different. Using a video-mediated question-and-answer format allows discussion of typically taboo topics with
sensitivity, candor, and empathy. As a publicly participatory art project, it invites diverse members of the community to listen to these conversations, engage at a

339

comfortable level, and possibly respond through interactive
exhibits, video-tagging, online forums, and live discussions.
The objective is to challenge and redeﬁne mainstream perceptions of Black masculinity in the context of extremely
negative and stereotypical media portrayals. By including
everyday participants who share personal stories to spontaneous questions posed, in an unedited manner, by other
members of the group, this project creates a realistic,
authentic voice that invites changes to existing simplistic
mental models of Black masculinity.

Discussion
This study explores shifts in transmedia convergence culture that are leading to new forms of knowledge, literacies, production, and consumption among racial/ethnic
minorities in the United States. The two case studies
showcase harnessing of transmedia storytelling by racial/
ethnic minorities to enhance educational and community-building objectives, rather than for the traditional
for-proﬁt goals of mainstream multinational media. ELH
serves as an example of the formula of telenovela serving
geo-ethnic transmedia entertainment-education efforts
by focusing on Latino youth in California. Question
Bridge uses video-based question-and-answer dialogue
connecting various types of Black males through a participatory, public video artistic project that successfully
encompasses several transmedia elements to renegotiate
Black masculinity.
Research on transmedia convergence has primarily
focused on elaborating fans’ practices in the context of
mainstream commercial entertainment created by multinational media corporations such as Disney, Marvel,
Facebook, or Instagram (Jenkins 2006; Scolari 2013).
Such research has mainly discussed phenomena such as
advergames, Facebook pages for global brands, and
brand-focused mobile phone apps, which have started
erasing boundaries between various media genres,
between production and consumption, between private
and public spaces, and between entertainment and
advertising. However, as audiences from marginalized
groups in society acquire new media literacies in a transmedia convergence culture, several grassroots community-level initiatives are also using multiple media
formats, platforms, and genres for alternative inclusive
forms of storytelling. These unique media literacies,
employed by racial/ethnic minority groups, produce
more progressive, culturally sensitive alternatives to
mainstream commercial entertainment. Some of these
efforts have maintained the formula of traditional commercial entertainment but creatively appropriated them
to include more educational, socially relevant messages.
Others have experimented with a fresh methodology and

340

S. RAMASUBRAMANIAN

more ﬂuid ways of arranging interactive media, “safe
spaces,” that allow deeper, meaningful, and honest
conversations.
Given the proﬁt motive of mainstream media, the
industry rarely considers thoughtful, complex, and multifaceted representations of ethnic/racial minorities. At
best, cultural differences become commodities of the
simplest variety to be marketable to various ethnic
groups. Frustrated by these images and representations
that are narrow in scope, some media producers and
artists have tried to create alternative narratives that connect with lived realities and everyday experiences. ELH
uses a scripted ﬁctional telenovela genre to connect with
the cultural practices of teenagers in East Los Angeles,
whereas Question Bridge uses unscripted video interviews to initiate intergroup conversations about Black
males. Although ELH has interactive elements in its
transmedia narratives, Question Bridge is more participatory in nature than ELH, with a focus on dialogue and
discussion. Another distinction is that ELH is a culturally
sensitive and geographically rooted narrative, whereas,
Question Bridge focuses more on renegotiating racial/
ethnic identity.
In both the cases, the emphasis is on creating an internal
dialogue rather than an external resistance through these
projects. While prior research on media advocacy has
emphasized how community organizations engage various
media as forms of digital resistance to raise awareness of
the rights of underresourced and marginalized groups, this
study focuses on initiatives that use entertainment and art
to reafﬁrm and redeﬁne racial/ethnic identities. That is,
rather than use an explicit politicized resistive rhetorical
strategy, the community-oriented models in this study use
transmedia culture as a means to implicitly create alterspaces for media engagement.
While ELH and Question Bridge do provide alternative community-oriented spaces for afﬁrming cultural
identities, they are not necessarily focused on inequalities
of power, inﬂuence, structural racism, and the political–
economic aspects of media production. Question Bridge
might, to some extent, induce participants to think critically, debate, and discuss collectively about the political,
economic, and cultural aspects of being a Black male.
ELH may lead to discussions of practices for sexual/
reproductive health among Latino youth. However, neither of these initiatives, ELH in particular, is resistive or
politicized. As Ferguson (2011) argued, any effective critical media literacy curriculum that does not connect the
cultural with the politico-economic system is too narrow.
Speciﬁc data on the real-world outcomes of ELH and
Question Bridge are not available but would help gauge the
productions’ effectiveness. Although ELH had an explicit
agenda of not including stereotypical Latino media

characterizations, the extent of success remains questionable. While criticism of ELH includes a lack of diverse
representation of Latinos, arguably, Question Bridge has
been successful in portraying the multiplicity, plurality, and
complexity of Black masculinity. Whether this strategy of
exposing audiences to counter-stereotypes increases or
decreases implicit attitudes is not yet clear.

Conclusion
The scope of the scholarship on new media literacies
should expand beyond digital literacy skills and media production in at least two ways: First, research on new media
literacies should include the perspectives of racial/ethnic
minorities by examining the use of transmedia spaces to
negotiate and assert unique identities. Such research should
also include community-oriented, grassroots initiatives that
use digital new media to amplify minority voices and redeﬁne the identities of marginalized groups in a multicultural,
transmedia context. Second, media literacies cannot be disconnected from the politics of cultural citizenship. A more
holistic critical approach to new media literacies should
transcend digital multimodal literacy skills in traditional
classroom settings to critically engage the politics of racial
identity, media belongingness, participatory democracy,
and cultural citizenship.
In sum, in an age of spreadable transmedia storytelling, effort should transcend simply developing multimodal digital skills to incorporate critical media literacy
and focus on social impact, public good, and community
building. Initiatives such as East Los High and Question
Bridge serve as cases of culturally sensitive, geo-ethnic,
digital storytelling that can promote greater good and
larger community goals such as health, social justice, and
group vitality, thus providing a meaningful alternative to
traditional, commercial, uses of transmedia storytelling.

Acknowledgments
The author thanks Cara Wallis and Aya Yadlin-Segal for their
input on previous versions of the article.

References
Abrams, J. R., W. P. Eveland, and H. Giles. 2003. The effects of
television on group vitality: Can television empower nondominant groups? Communication Yearbook 27:193–220.
Aoki, G., and J. S. Mio. 2009. Stereotypes and media images. In
Asian American psychology: Current perspectives, ed. N.
Tiwari and A. N. Alvarez, 421–40. New York, NY: Psychology Press.
Appadurai, A. 2011. Disjuncture and difference in the global cultural economy. In Cultural theory: An anthology, ed. I. Szeman
and T. Kaposy, 282–95. New York, NY: Wiley-Blackwell.

THE INFORMATION SOCIETY

Appiah, O. 2001. Black, White, Hispanic, and Asian American
adolescents’ responses to culturally embedded ads. Howard
Journal of Communication 12 (1):29–48.
Appiah, O. 2002. Black and White viewers’ perception and
recall of occupational characters on television. Journal of
Communication 52 (4):776–93.
Bandura, A. 1977. Self-efﬁcacy: Toward a unifying theory of
behavioral change. Psychological Review 84 (2):191.
Bandura, A. 1997. Self-efﬁcacy: The exercise of control. New
York, NY: Freeman.
Belcher, C. 2014. Question Bridge provides a forum for black
men to hold honest discussion. Style Weekly, July 22. http://
www.styleweekly.com/richmond/black-on-black/Content?o
idD2097305 (accessed October 18, 2015).
Block, A. B. 2013. How Hulu lured Latinos to “East Los High”.
Hollywood Reporter, July 26. http://www.hollywoodre
porter.com/news/east-los-high-how-hulu-590957 (accessed
October 18, 2015).
Bogle, D. 2001. Toms, coons, mulattoes, mammies, and bucks:
An interpretive history of Blacks in American ﬁlms. London,
UK: Bloomsbury.
Bonilla, Y., and J. Rosa. 2015. #Ferguson: Digital protest, hashtag ethnography, and the racial politics of social media in
the United States. American Ethnologist 42 (1):4–17.
Burgess, J. 2006. Hearing ordinary voices: Cultural studies, vernacular creativity and digital storytelling. Continuum: Journal of Media & Cultural Studies 20 (2):201–21.
Burgess, M. C., K. E. Dill, S. P. Stermer, S. R. Burgess, and B. P.
Brown. 2011. Playing with prejudice: The prevalence and
consequences of racial stereotypes in video games. Media
Psychology 14 (3):289–311.
Byrne, S. 2009. Media literacy interventions: What makes them
boom or boomerang? Communication Education 58 (1):1–14.
Castro, T. 2013. “East Los High” on Hulu is ﬁrst English language show with all Latino cast. Hufﬁngton Post, June 6.
http://www.hufﬁngtonpost.com/2013/06/06/east-los-highhulu_n_3395762.html (accessed October 18, 2015).
Christian, A. J. 2011. Fandom as industrial response: Producing
identity in an independent web series. Transformative Works
and Cultures 8. http://journal.transformativeworks.org/index.
php/twc/article/view/250/237 (accessed April 10, 2016).
Cleary, P. F., G. Pierce, and E. M. Trauth. 2006. Closing the
digital divide: Understanding racial, ethnic, social class,
gender and geographic disparities in Internet use among
school age children in the United States. Universal Access in
the Information Society 4 (4):354–73.
Coppa, F. 2008. Women, Star Trek, and the early development
of fannish vidding. Transformative Works and Cultures 1:
online. http://journal.transformativeworks.org/index.php/
twc/article/view/44/64 (accessed April 10, 2016).
Correa, T., and S. H. Jeong. 2011. Race and online content
creation: Why minorities are actively participating in
the Web. Information, Communication & Society 14
(5):638–59.
Couldry, N. 2008. Mediatization or mediation? Alternative
understandings of the emergent space of digital storytelling.
New Media & Society 10 (3):373.
Daniels, J. 2009. Cloaked websites: Propaganda, cyber-racism
and epistemology in the digital era. New Media & Society
11 (5):659–83.
Daniels, J. 2012. Intervention: Reality TV, whiteness, and narratives of addiction. In Critical perspectives on addiction

341

(Advances in Medical Sociology 14), ed. J. Netherland, 103–
25. Bingley, UK: Emerald.
Dixon, T. L., and D. Linz. 2000. Overrepresentation and underrepresentation of African Americans and Latinos as lawbreakers
on television news. Journal of Communication 50 (2):131–54.
Entman, R. M., and A. Rojecki. 2001. The Black image in the
White mind: Media and race in America. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Ferguson, S. 2011. Classroom contradictions: Popular media in
Ontario schools’ literacy and citizenship education policies.
Education, Citizenship & Social Justice 6 (2):137–51.
Fishbein, M., K. Hall-Jamieson, E. Zimmer, I. Von Haeften,
and R. Nabi. 2002. Avoiding the boomerang: Testing the
relative effectiveness of antidrug public service announcements before a national campaign. American Journal of
Public Health 92 (2):238–45.
Fujioka, Y. 2005. Black media images as a perceived threat to African American ethnic identity: Coping responses, perceived
public perception, and attitudes towards afﬁrmative action.
Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media 49 (4):450–67.
Georgiou, M. 2005. Diasporic media across Europe: Multicultural societies and the universalism-particularism continuum. Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies 31 (3):481–
98.
Gerbner, G. 1972. Communication and social environment.
Scientiﬁc American 227 (3):152–60.
Gerbner, G., and L. Gross. 1976. Living with television: The
violence proﬁle. Journal of Communication 26 (2):172–94.
Giles, H., R. Y. Bourhis, and D. M. Taylor. 1977. Towards a
theory of language in ethnic group relations. In Language,
ethnicity and intergroup relations, ed. H. Giles, 307–48.
London, UK: Academic Press.
Gray, H. 2005. Cultural moves: African Americans and the politics
of representation. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Hall, G. 2014. The alchemists turning “East Los High” into
gold on Hulu with transmedia approach. Biz Journals, July
8. http://www.bizjournals.com/losangeles/news/2014/07/08
/alchemists-east-los-high-on-hulu.html?pageDall (accessed
October 18, 2015).
Harcup, T. 2011. Alternative journalism as active citizenship.
Journalism 12 (1):15–31.
Hargittai, E., and G. Walejko. 2008. The participation divide:
Content creation and sharing in the digital age 1. Information, Community and Society 11 (2):239–56.
Harp, D., I. Bachmann, and L. Guo. 2012. The whole online
world is watching: Proﬁling social networking sites and activists in China, Latin America, and the United States. International Journal of Communication 6:298–321.
Hughey, M. W., and J. Daniels. 2013. Racist comments at
online news sites: a methodological dilemma for discourse
analysis. Media, Culture & Society 35 (3):332–47.
Hoffman, D. L., T. P., Novak, and A. E., Schlosser. 2001. The
evolution of the digital divide: Examining the relationship
of race to Internet access and usage over time. In The digital
divide: Facing a crisis or creating a myth?, ed. B. Compaine,
47–97. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Jackson, L. A., Y. Zhao, A. Kolenic III, H. E. Fitzgerald, R. Harold, and A. Von Eye. 2008. Race, gender, and information
technology use: The new digital divide. CyberPsychology &
Behavior 11 (4):437–42.
James, M. 2014. Hulu announces slate of original shows, return of
“East Los High”. Los Angeles Times, January 8. http://articles.lat

342

S. RAMASUBRAMANIAN

imes.com/2014/jan/08/entertainment/la-et-ct-hulu-original-sh
ows-return-of-east-los-high-20140107 (accessed October 18,
2015).
Jenkins, H. 2006. Fans, bloggers, and gamers: Exploring participatory culture. New York, NY: NYU Press.
Jenkins, H., S. Ford, and J. Green. 2013. Spreadable media: Creating value and meaning in a networked culture. New York,
NY: NYU Press.
Jones, S., C. Johnson-Yale, S. Millermaier, and F. S. Perez.
2009. Everyday life, online: US college students’ use of the
Internet. First Monday 14 (10). http://ﬁrstmonday.org/arti
cle/view/2649/2301 (accessed April 10, 2016).
Kim, Y. C., and S. J. Ball-Rokeach. 2006. Community storytelling network, neighborhood context, and civic engagement:
A multilevel approach. Human Communication Research
32 (4):411–39.
King, J. 2012. An artist’s rare, intimate conversation about
black masculinity. Color Lines February 23. http://color
lines.com/archives/2012/02/question_bridge.html (accessed
October 18, 2015).
Lenhart, A., and J. B. Horrigan. 2003. Re-visualizing the digital
divide as a digital spectrum. IT & Society 1 (5):23–39.
Lin, W. Y., and H. Song. 2006. Geo-ethnic storytelling: An
examination of ethnic media content in contemporary
immigrant communities. Journalism 7 (3):362–88.
Mastro, D. E., and A. L. Robinson. 2000. Cops and crooks:
Images of minorities on primetime television. Journal of
Criminal Justice 28 (5):385–96.
Mastro, D. E., E. Blecha, and A. Atwell Seate. 2011. Characterizations of criminal athletes: A systematic examination of
sports news depictions of race and crime. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media 55 (4):526–42.
Mirrlees, T. 2013. Global entertainment media: Between cultural imperialism and cultural globalization. London, UK:
Routledge.
Mossberger, K., C. J. Tolbert, and M. Stansbury. 2003. Virtual
inequality: Beyond the digital divide. Washington, DC:
Georgetown University Press.
Mossberger, K., D. Kaplan, and M. A. Gilbert. 2008. Going
online without easy access: A tale of three cities. Journal of
Urban Affairs 30 (5):469–88.
Mouffe, C., ed. 1992. Dimensions of radical democracy: Pluralism, citizenship, community. London, UK: Verso.
Nakamura, L. 2009. Don’t hate the player, hate the game: The
racialization of labor in World of Warcraft. Critical Studies
in Media Communication 26 (2):128–44.
Nakamura, L. 2013. Cybertypes: Race, ethnicity, and identity on
the Internet. London, UK: Routledge.
New California Media. 2005. Ethnic media in America: The
giant hidden in plain sight. http://www.npr.org/documents/
2005/jul/ncmfreport.pdf (accessed August 6, 2016).
Ohler, J. 2013. Digital storytelling in the classroom: New media
pathways to literacy, learning, and creativity. Thousand
Oaks, CA: Corwin Press.
Ortiz, M. 2013. NYRican in LA: When real East Los met “East
Los High”. Fusion.net October 25. http://fusion.net/abc_uni

vision/opinion/story/hulus-east-los-high-series-centers-sexcrime-17179 (accessed October 18, 2015).
Perry, B., and P. Olsson. 2009. Cyberhate: The globalization of
hate. Information & Communications Technology Law 18
(2):185–99.
Pew Internet and American Life Project. 2014. African Americans and technology use. http://www.pewinternet.org/2014/
01/06/african-americans-and-technology-use (accessed October 18, 2015).
Pi~
non, J., and V. Rojas. 2011. Language and cultural identity in
the new conﬁguration of the US Latino TV industry. Global
Media and Communication 7 (2):129–47.
Ramasubramanian, S. 2011. The impact of stereotypical versus
counterstereotypical media exemplars on racial attitudes,
causal attributions, and support for afﬁrmative action.
Communication Research 38 (4):497–516.
Rivera, J. 2013. “East Los High”: Finally a Latino-themed show
we can be proud of. Examiner, June 18. http://www.exam
iner.com/article/east-los-high-ﬁnally-a-latino-themedshow-we-can-be-proud-of (accessed October 18, 2015).
Sabido, M. 2004. The origins of entertainment-education. In Entertainment-education and social change: History, research, and
practice, ed. A. Singhal, M. C. Cody, E. M. Rogers, and M.
Sabido, 61–74. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Scolari, C. A. 2013. Lostology: Transmedia storytelling and
expansion/compression strategies. Semiotica 195:45–68.
Scolari, C. A. 2014. El Eterntuata: transmedia expansions,
political resistance and popular appropriations of a human
hero. In Transmedia archaeology: Storytelling in the borderlands of science ﬁction, comics, and pulp magazines, ed. C.
Scolari, P. Bertetti, and M. Freeman, 55–71. Basingstoke,
UK: Palgrave Connect.
Shome, R., and R. Hegde. 2002. Culture, communication and
the challenge of globalization. Critical Studies in Media
Communication 19 (2):172–189.
Singhal, A., and E. M. Rogers. 2002. A theoretical agenda for entertainment-education. Communication Theory 12 (2):117–35.
Singhal, A., H. Wang, and E. M. Rogers. 2012. The rising tide
of entertainment-education in communication campaigns.
In Public communication campaigns, ed. R. Rice and C. K.
Atkin, 323–36. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Spooner, T., and L. Rainie. 2000. African-Americans and the
Internet. Washington, DC: Pew Internet and American Life
Project.
Terrero, N. 2014. “East Los High” builds on Hulu’s success
among Hispanic audiences. Entertainment Weekly, July 9.
http://www.ew.com/article/2014/07/09/east-los-high-builds
-on-hulus-success-among-hispanic-audiences
(accessed
October 18, 2015).
Tuchman, G. 1978. Making news. New York, NY: Free Press.
Valdivia, A. N. 2010. Latino/as in the media. Cambridge, UK:
Polity.
Wasko, J., and E. R. Meehan. 2013. Critical crossroads or parallel routes?: Political economy and new approaches to studying media industries and cultural products. Cinema Journal
52 (3):150–57.

Copyright of Information Society is the property of Routledge and its content may not be
copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's
express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for
individual use.

