EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/10/2018 9:48 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES
AN: 802227 ; Gronstedt, Anders, Ramos, Marc.; Learning Through Transmedia Storytelling
Account: undeloan.main.ehost

Copyright @ 2014. American Society for Training & Development.
All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable
copyright law.

LEARNING TECHNOLOGIES

VOL. 31 • ISSUE 1401 • JANUARY 2014

AUTHOR

Copyright @ 2014. American Society for Training & Development.
All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.

Anders Gronstedt

Anders Gronstedt, Ph.D. is the
president of Gronstedt Group,
which helps global companies
like GE, United Healthcare, Deloitte,
Microsoft, Kimberly-Clark, Jamba
Juice, and government clients
like the city of New York improve
performance with innovative
learning approaches. These include
next-generation digital simulations,
gaming, and immersive 3D virtual
worlds. His articles have appeared
in the Harvard Business Review
and he hosts a weekly speaking
series. Contact him at
anders@gronstedtgroup.com.

Marc Ramos

Marc Ramos currently leads
Google’s Professional Development
strategy and programs related to
the training of educators globally.
Previously at Google, he led global
instructional design for Google’s
central people operations
function. Contact him at
marcramos@google.com.

Community Manager,
Learning Technologies
Justin Brusino

LEARNING THROUGH
TRANSMEDIA
STORYTELLING
THE HERO’S JOURNEY...................................................................1
NEW MEDIA TECHNIQUE JOINS OLD STORYTELLING…...............5
THE STORY, THE LEARNER, AND TRANSMEDIA...........................5
THE TRAINER’S ROLE...................................................................11
WHAT’S YOUR STORY?..................................................................12
REFERENCES & RESOURCES......................................................13
JOB AID
	 Tips for Designing Transmedia Learning..................................14
	 Learners’ Arc Alignment Exercise ...........................................16
	

Need a trainer’s lifeline? Visit infoline.astd.org.

Editor, Infoline
Patty Gaul

Associate Editor
Sarah Cough

Production Design
Jane deBruijn

Infoline is a real got-a-problem, find-a-solution publication. Concise and practical, Infoline
is an information lifeline written specifically for trainers and other workplace learning and
performance professionals. Whether the subject is a current trend in the field, or triedand-true training basics, Infoline is a complete, reliable trainer’s information resource.
Infoline is available by subscription and single copy purchase.
Printed in the United States of America.
For help or inquiries about your subscription, please contact Customer Care at
1.800.628.2783/1.703.683.8100 (international).

Infoline (ISSN 87559269, ISBN 978-1-56286-951-9, Electronic ISBN 978-1-60728-400-0) is published monthly by the American Society for Training & Development, 1640 King Street, Alexandria, VA 22314. Infoline is available for subscription in print or digitally. The subscription rate for 12 issues is $99 (for ASTD national members) and $139 (for nonmembers). Periodicals postage
paid at Alexandria, Virginia, and additional entries. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to Infoline, P.O. Box 1443, Alexandria, VA 22313-1443. Claims for replacement of subscription issues
not received must be made within three months of the issue date. Copyright © January 2014 Infoline and ASTD. All rights reserved. No part of this work covered by the copyright hereon may
be reproduced or used in any form or by any means—graphic, electronic, or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, taping, or information storage and retrieval systems—without the
express written permission of the publisher. For permission requests, please go to www.copyright.com, or contact Copyright Clearance Center (CCC), 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923
(telephone: 978.750.8500, fax: 978.646.8600). ASTD Press grants permission for the material on pages 14-16 to be reproduced for personal use.

EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/10/2018 9:48 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES
AN: 802227 ; Gronstedt, Anders, Ramos, Marc.; Learning Through Transmedia Storytelling
Account: undeloan.main.ehost

Learning Through Transmedia Storytelling

Copyright @ 2014. American Society for Training & Development.
All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.

W

hether its theater from Aristotle, the
Japanese ghost story structure in Kabuki
plays, or modern screenplays such as Lawrence of
Arabia, there’s a timeless similarity with commerce
and story—most recently enhanced by transmedia.
And we participate as observers and spectators filled
with similar challenge, charm, and conflict.
The classic storytelling narrative is being revived
today. A new generation of “always-connected”
workers is watching more than 22 hours of online
video per month on mobile devices. Forward-thinking
business and learning leaders are reinventing the
ancient tradition of storytelling, weaving compelling
stories across different platforms and formats to
inspire and engage the audience to action. This
new way of developing a narrative across multiple
platforms to expand learning and engagement is
called transmedia storytelling.
This Infoline issue will:
•	 provide a framework for good
storytelling techniques
•	 explain what transmedia storytelling
is, and why and how it is effective
•	 help you find a practical and valuable “story
structure” for learning design challenges
•	 explain your role as a trainer
•	 provide examples of effective transmedia
storytelling in the business and
learning environments.

THE HERO’S JOURNEY
“There are only two or three human
stories, and they go on repeating
themselves as fiercely as if they had
never happened before.” - Willa Cather

ones fueled by a standard framework filled with
challenge and adventure—both mystical and real.
The archetype in the center of these adventures is
the pivot point of the story, or as Campbell describes,
the men and women with the “sense of the call,”
otherwise known as the hero.
Like many forms of art, this pattern can be played in
endless variations to feel fresh, yet familiar. What
works universally with this structure is its reliance
and reliability for telling stories based on selfreflection, stretching one’s capability, finding friends,
inspiration, attainment of goals, and perhaps what
up until this point had been undiscovered talents.
The Hero’s Journey story structure has several
attributes we can reuse to succeed at work and in
our organizations. That is, we can use the Hero’s
Journey as a device to design instruction and we can
replicate it in our training function using the media
formats currently available to build the capability and
agility required to stay competitive and compelling.
Campbell’s Hero’s Journey structure is comprised
of several parts or stages—typically 12 sections in
a linear progression. These stages range from the
hero discovering a call to adventure, to dealing with
a life-changing challenge, to finding some sort of
wisdom or resolution.

The Ordinary World
Here our hero or heroine is introduced in a world
that appears content, familiar, or ordinary. Yet
there’s something unnerving or discomforting that
is sheltering the hero’s ability to fit in, to be normal
in his village, circumstance, or society. Our war
hero Lawrence in the desert of Arabia, for example,
is drawn to a deep yet unknown thirst for war,
battle, and vanity beyond his quiet, passive means.
He senses a need for a different life, yet remains
unaware of the events ahead.

The Call to Adventure
Mythologist and scholar Joseph Campbell describes
the human narrative structure as the Hero’s
Journey, which has deep roots is his classic work
The Hero with a Thousand Faces. Campbell suggests
that the most classic and enduring stories are the

A life-altering event occurs. This may be an external
situation that presents a dilemma or challenge. Or
it could be something that is internally recognized.
In either circumstance, our hero is given a signal
either to change or that something near is beyond

COPYRIGHT © ASTD

EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/10/2018 9:48 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES
AN: 802227 ; Gronstedt, Anders, Ramos, Marc.; Learning Through Transmedia Storytelling
Account: undeloan.main.ehost

1

Learning Through Transmedia Storytelling

Copyright @ 2014. American Society for Training & Development.
All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.

his control. In the classic myth of Perseus, King
Polydectes orders Perseus to bring him the head of
Medusa. For Luke Skywalker, Obi Wan’s holographic
message serves as an invitation for Luke to leave his
ordinary world.

Refusal of the Call
Next, our hero is hesitant to change. She sees a
need for adventure or to address a calling, yet there
may be too many unknowns. Despite the fear, new
insights or self-assessment leads the hero to make
a difficult decision. For the young Michael Corleone
in The Godfather, after recognizing his ailing father is
not secure in an unguarded hospital, he decides to
join the family business.

Meeting with the Mentor
Merlin the Magician, Mr. Miyagi from The Karate Kid,
and the Wizard in The Wizard of Oz all played the role
of the seasoned, well-traveled mentor. Here, our
mentor provides wisdom, special skills, or perhaps
weapons to our hero. At some point, the shared
wisdom and skills are tested and the hero must
face her enemy or the unknown, alone. Now she is
truly conscious of her existing weaknesses or gap.

Crossing the Threshold
Our hero now formally recognizes that he must
leave his ordinary world. He cannot turn back. This
is when the story takes off—literally on flights to
Jupiter, in a balloon, or perhaps on a train. Our hero
has drawn his line in the sand and has crossed over
the first threshold.

The Approach to the Inmost Cave
The hero arrives at a dangerous location where his
mission may be completed, yet the mystery gets
more tangled or threatening. He must confront
a deep, personal conflict. For a soon-to-be King
Arthur, he enters Chapel Perilous in search of the
Holy Grail. In many Hollywood war films, the young
soldier comes to terms with his duty for battle and
searches deep within to muster the courage.

Ordeal
This is typically the middle point of the story. Our
hero now faces a significant trial where her life is
challenged and death seems probable. Will Luke
survive the wall-crunching depths of the Death Star?
Will our hero exit the dragon’s cave? As screenwriter
Chris Vogler shares in The Writer’s Journey, “This is
also like the rites of passage and rites of initiation
into fraternities and secret societies. The initiate is
forced to taste death and experience resurrection.
You’re never more alive when you think you’re going
to die.”

Seizing the Sword, Reward
After surviving the battle, slaying the dragon, and
rising from the ashes, our hero now possesses her
reward. In many myths, a unique weapon or special
elixir is gained. Perhaps a personal conflict has
been reconciled—either with himself, a parent, or
a village. Here, our hero is acutely aware of the
weaknesses he has conquered, and the competence
required for mastering his destiny.

The Road Back
The Tests, Allies, and Enemies
Our hero now meets others on a similar mission, or
some to test his will and character. Or, perhaps the
others’ intent remains a mystery or a complex mix of
romance and rivalry. Whether it’s the cantina where
Luke meets Han Solo, or a Western bar with whiskey
bottles and bullets flying, our hero begins to make
friends and foes in this new world.

Our hero makes her way home with the reward—
perhaps completing the adventure; yet there may
be new dangers on the way. Perhaps the heroine
chooses not to go home, just as Thelma and Louise
decided to remain outlaws.

2
EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/10/2018 9:48 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES
AN: 802227 ; Gronstedt, Anders, Ramos, Marc.; Learning Through Transmedia Storytelling
Account: undeloan.main.ehost

COPYRIGHT © ASTD

Learning Through Transmedia Storytelling

Copyright @ 2014. American Society for Training & Development.
All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.

ALTERNATIVE STORY STRUCTURES FOR TRAINING
The Hero’s Journey and instruction generally flow in a linear progression that starts with orienting the learner to a
problem or situation, sharing the specific problem or opportunity, providing a solution, and concluding the training.
But using variations of the linear structure can have advantages for certain learning challenges. Two types of these
variations include problem-oriented story structure and the flashback model.
In sales training, for example, salespeople are typically focused on trying to solve their customer’s problems
while also, of course, meeting their quota potential. Their focus may include understanding clients’ market
growth needs; staying current and innovative; and determining how to increase their footprint and revenue.
These problems or needs—once qualified—are ideally addressed and solved by the solutions the vendor
provides—the “solution-selling” approach.
From a training perspective, one suggested course structure highlights the introduction of the client’s problem
first, followed by the orientation, solution, and conclusion. For example, we open the training stating a client’s
need to increase market penetration. Both threat and opportunity are conveyed with a case study or simulation,
which then sets the stage and challenge for the class.
How we now structure our course—keeping in mind heroic activities such as consequences, collaborative problemsolving with allies, and so on—may look a little different. For our sales training example, the arc or engagement
level is peaked at the beginning, as is the clearly stated problem and consequences.
Another viable storytelling structure shifts the mindset, or perhaps the expectations, of the learner from
immediately trying to solve a problem up front, to playing more of a sleuth or investigator—or as some designers
call it, conducting a learning autopsy. Here the structure is turned on its head and the conclusion is provided up
front, followed by the orientation to the situation, and then re-qualifying the problem and suggested solution.
With this model, the course works backwards unraveling how the answer was found. This may be an ideal
structure for training engineers, as it fulfills an innate passion to figure out how things work by breaking them
down first. This is called a flashback structure where the final conclusion may share new insights or advancements
to the problem.
Consider the purpose and audience when you decide how to structure your training program. While a traditional
linear style is appropriate for most training, a different approach may help be more effective if the learning
experience is as important as the content.

COPYRIGHT © ASTD

EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/10/2018 9:48 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES
AN: 802227 ; Gronstedt, Anders, Ramos, Marc.; Learning Through Transmedia Storytelling
Account: undeloan.main.ehost

3

Learning Through Transmedia Storytelling

Copyright @ 2014. American Society for Training & Development.
All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.

STORYTELLING STRUCTURE AND COGNITIVE PROGRESSION
HERO’S JOURNEY

Vogler’S CHARACTER ARC

LEARNERS’ ARC CONSIDERATIONS

Ordinary
World for big change
Preparing

Limited awareness of problem

Current skills known and identified

Call to Adventure

Increased awareness

Growth need clarified; selfassessment identifies gap

Refusal of the Call

Reluctance to change

Sacrifice, challenge and/or
consequence of not changing
is explicit

Meeting With the Mentor

Overcoming reluctance

Guidance provided:
• clear learning objectives
• peer reviews
• best practice example

Crossing the First Threshold

Committing to change

Activity introduced or modeled;
learner is committed

Tests, Allies, and Enemies

Experimenting with first change

Role play introduced

The Approach

Preparing for big change

Self-reflection on importance,
challenge, consequence

The Ordeal

Attempting big change

Course activity(s) in play

Reward

Consequences of the attempt

Feedback is direct, personal, candid,
and positive

Road Back

Rededication to change

Reflection on closing the gap and
new meaning in the “real world;”
Kirkpatrick Level 3 Application;
possible inclusion of peers and
supervisor to confirm student
understood

Resurrection

Final attempt at big change

Ability to truly apply in real world
or simulation

Return With the Elixir

Final mastery of the problem

New skill and knowledge applied
as routine

4
EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/10/2018 9:48 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES
AN: 802227 ; Gronstedt, Anders, Ramos, Marc.; Learning Through Transmedia Storytelling
Account: undeloan.main.ehost

COPYRIGHT © ASTD

Learning Through Transmedia Storytelling

Copyright @ 2014. American Society for Training & Development.
All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.

Resurrection
With the secret designs of the Death Star in hand,
or Arthur’s sword ready for battle, our hero can now
face the fear originally kept secret in the Ordinary
World. With new scars and wisdom, her sacrifices
have led to a resurrection. She is now transformed
through self-reflection, battling, and teaming with
others—she has attained the reward and is ready
to conquer any circumstance.

Return with the Elixir
The hero returns to the ordinary world with new
skills, tools, and lessons in wisdom. Yet it’s not what
she’s gained that makes the return so special, but
the treasure found that can benefit her town, family,
or future quests. As Vogler continues, “Sometimes
it’s just knowledge or experience, but unless he
comes back with the elixir or some boon to mankind,
he’s doomed to repeat the adventure until he does.”

NEW MEDIA TECHNIQUE
JOINS OLD STORYTELLING
This basic story structure remains today, with
transmedia storytelling—the technique by
which narratives are told across multiple media
platforms—increasingly being used in the training,
business, and academic settings. The term
transmedia storytelling was coined by media
studies’ professor Henry Jenkins, who explains that
“Each medium makes its own unique contribution
to the unfolding of the story.” Jenkins uses The
Matrix—the 1999 science fiction blockbuster film—as
an example. The movie actually encompasses three
separate movies, a series of animated shorts, two
collections of comic book stories, and multitude of
video games. The storyline includes a future society
in which most humans’ view of reality is actually a
simulated reality, from whence the movie gets its
name. Different media channels feed each other, and
unlock secrets that add more depth and meaning to
the parts of the overall story in the other platforms.
Transmedia storytelling is different from
“multimedia” e-learning programs where the
user can click on the same screen to experience
video, text, and interactivity. With transmedia, or
cross-media as it is also called, the learner has to

actively seek out the content. The various media
formats aren’t just repeating the same story in
different ways, but expanding different elements of
it. The strength of each medium is used to tell an
interconnected story that can be enjoyed both on
its own and in context with the overarching story.

THE STORY, THE LEARNER,
AND TRANSMEDIA
So how does a training and development
professional use the traditional story structure
across media platforms to ensure that the employee
or student grasps the underlying message or
develops the intended skill? In The Writer’s Journey,
Vogler suggests that the development of the
story is more critical than the development of the
character—yet one cannot exist without the other.
Character-driven structures are exemplified by
dramatic situations that may significantly alter one’s
life, in contrast with what happens in our real lives
where our daily situations have varied degrees of
complexity and consequences. There’s a certain
tension when building enduring stories where
the framework and flow of the Hero’s Journey is
dependent on the self-reflection, crisis, and courage
of the characters within the story.
Vogler calls the activities of the character that
parallel the story’s development, the Character
Arc. This development aligns with Noel Burch’s
Four Stages of learning any new skill: unconscious
incompetence, conscious incompetence, conscious
competence, and unconscious competence. And
this is the basis of mapping story structure with the
character, or learner in instructional structure.
For those of you who may not see the connection
of the character’s struggle to that of the learner, let
us explain the learning challenges that align with
character development as the basic story structure
evolves, and how it is tied to our world of
designing instruction.
In the learning and development context, the training
professional assists the employee or student
to move along the Hero’s Journey. The learner
undergoes what is basically an inner exploration
to understanding where she’s currently at, where
she should be, and then deciding to make a change.

COPYRIGHT © ASTD

EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/10/2018 9:48 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES
AN: 802227 ; Gronstedt, Anders, Ramos, Marc.; Learning Through Transmedia Storytelling
Account: undeloan.main.ehost

5

Learning Through Transmedia Storytelling

Copyright @ 2014. American Society for Training & Development.
All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.

CASE STUDY:
TRANSMEDIA FOR MICROSOFT D&I PROGRAM
Microsoft’s diversity and inclusion program is an example of a single story experience told across
multiple platforms. The program was developed by Korn/Ferry with strong partnership from Microsoft
for composition, and Gronstedt Group for the video production component. One week before the oneday training program, participants were sent a “movie trailer” to build excitement. The trailer showed
highlights of a dramatized television-style show, proclaiming, tongue-in-cheek, that “Human Resources
Illustrated gave it three thumbs up.”
When Microsoft leaders arrived for the live session, a facilitator introduced posters into the conference
facility featuring each character of the story with QR codes. Participants were divided into teams and
charged with locating the posters and scanning the QR codes with smartphones or tablets. Employees also
watched introductory videos of each character on their mobile devices to learn more about each of them.
The scavenger hunt activity leveraged all five characteristics of the transmedia play that aids learning:
The team needed to be resourceful to find the posters; social to discuss the issues each character is
introduced; mobile through the use of smartphones and tablets; accessible to scan the QR codes in any
order and join in from a variety of starting points of their stories; and finally re-playable on the mobile
device throughout the day—so they could go back to earlier videos that make more sense later in the story.
After the introductory scavenger hunt, attendees watched a video that set up the storyline: An IT team is
planning a large project where tremendous demands will be placed on them. Annika, the team leader, is the
“hero” of the journey. However, Dariush, who participates via conference call from Kracow, Poland, doesn’t
see her as such.
Later in the day, the class watched scribe videos—animated shorts of
artist sketches drawn on a whiteboard with audio narration. In one of
these instructional videos about conducting a coaching conversation,
the characters from the live-action video appear as cartoons. The
animated characters in the scribes are in narrative synchronization
with the live-action video. However, we don’t hear the characters talk.
An instructor voiceover talks about how to hold an effective coaching
conversation and illustrates his points with the animated Annika and
Dariush characters.
Each medium is used for its strengths: Live-action video drives the storyline forward. In one of the videos,
Sara, an HR business partner, calls Annika to schedule a meeting. Sara plays the role of the mentor, providing
information that Annika uses to face up to her faulty assumptions about her team members, and to start
coaching them. The scribe video explains particular skill sets, such as coaching skills, which the hero of the
live-action video puts to use.

6
EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/10/2018 9:48 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES
AN: 802227 ; Gronstedt, Anders, Ramos, Marc.; Learning Through Transmedia Storytelling
Account: undeloan.main.ehost

COPYRIGHT © ASTD

Copyright @ 2014. American Society for Training & Development.
All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.

Learning Through Transmedia Storytelling

Later in the day, each team was asked to
research the barriers to inclusion for one
of the characters in the story. The teams
received a laminated card with their printed
assignments and a QR code. By scanning the
QR codes, each team could watch a video
about one of the characters, which provided
more detailed backstories to their barriers.
For instance, team member Lauren reveals
that she’s expecting a baby and is hiding her
pregnancy as she is struggling with the idea
of disappointing the team because she wants
more work-life balance. She knows she
needs to speak to Annika, but is reluctant
and unsure of how to approach her.
The participants reported back on what
they’d learned, and how to address the
situation. The engagement level for the
training was evident: “Participants leaned
back to watch the story on the big screen and
leaned forward to watch on the small screen
throughout the day,” explains Doug Maxfield,
VP of Business Development at Korn/
Ferry. Each medium made its own unique
contribution to the storyline that framed the
day’s learning activities, and complements
our Meeting With the Mentor and Test,
Allies, and Enemies categories in the Hero’s
Journey structure.

Where she ends up from there—assuming she is
heroically recognizing her journey—should be better
than where she started. Most important, along the
way the learners become acutely aware of their
weaknesses or gaps, and determine how to address
them and how to make changes stick. Ideally, this
new knowledge becomes so ingrained that it is then
a natural part of everyday life.
Because of new technologies and the escalation of
hours spent with mobile devices, it makes sense that
L&D professionals use transmedia to engage their
trainees. The benefits of transmedia storytelling for
a learning organization are two-fold:
•	 The storyline will reach a larger audience by using
multiple channels.
•	 The audience will engage deeper with the story,
by hunting for clues and even helping to write
the story.
In addition to reaching the audience through this
engagement and through the best learning format
for each individual learning, transmedia storytelling
assists in learning because of five characteristics
it contains. Transmedia storytelling encourages
resourcefulness, and is social, mobile, accessible,
and re-playable.

Platforms for Transmedia
Instructional Design
So, how do we use transmedia best practices and
the learner’s arc in our daily work? Must every
course be a story? Must it follow a specific flow so
the indexing has relevance and utility? The answer
is, of course, “no.” Just as a playwright or novelist
has creative freedom, so should you as a learning
designer. As noted earlier in this Infoline, there
are characteristics we suggest you follow as a
foundation, and then decide on the best structure
or storytelling.
Transmedia storytelling works best for strategic
change management challenges where the
investment can be justified. Because stories are both
memorable and persuasive, a transmedia campaign
can achieve the dual purpose of training people
on the new skills and making a convincing case
for the change. It can help align people with a new

COPYRIGHT © ASTD

EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/10/2018 9:48 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES
AN: 802227 ; Gronstedt, Anders, Ramos, Marc.; Learning Through Transmedia Storytelling
Account: undeloan.main.ehost

7

Learning Through Transmedia Storytelling

Copyright @ 2014. American Society for Training & Development.
All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.

sales methodology, a new software system, a new
leadership philosophy, or a new corporate vision.
The skills are frequently more conceptual, although
hard skills training could be incorporated as part of
the program. The timeline for a transmedia learning
campaign is frequently longer, counted in months
and years rather than weeks and days.
Which platforms are best used for which elements
of the story parts and hence the training? Video
dramatizations can drive a plot forward, providing
a basis for the story so that participants have a
common starting point. Shorter videos accessible
through QR codes or hidden on the intranet allow
learners to immerse themselves in the story through
bonus content, sneak peeks, and the backstory of the
characters. As you see in the Microsoft case study,
one use of the QR codes is to develop the individual
characters more fully.
Games and 3D immersive virtual worlds can be used
to explore the world in the story and role play the
characters. In an L&D content, this could mean the
interaction with a potential buyer, or the “characters”
of a workplace: the manager, a colleague, and so on.
Learners can even develop the storyline by voting to
decide a show’s outcome or discuss plot lines with
each other on social media.
The sum, the Hero’s Journey, is being reinvented in a
plethora of new media that can be used in concert to
spin a unified and narrative experience. Let’s look at
a few of these new storytelling platforms.
Video Explosion
McCain Foods used transmedia storytelling to launch
a new leadership distinction message. A television
drama series was developed that featured Bob, a
plant manager who was visited by a consultant.
The characters went to a basketball game where
Bob learned about “being on the court versus in
the stands.” Bob also took a virtual canoe trip
where he learned a valuable lesson about being in
“circumstantial drift.”
The videos, which featured dialogue and meetings
with a colorful and dynamic cast, were launched
along with a series of podcast radio shows that
showcased McCain’s senior leaders as guests. The
videos and podcasts were supported by optional

toolkits designed for small groups where a peernominated team member facilitated discussion
around the topic to help ensure understanding
of key messages.
All the materials are available on a dedicated
web portal designed to match the look and feel
of the videos. As with today’s Netflix TV watcher,
learners can choose if they want to “binge-watch”
an entire video series or just watch a single sevenminute episode.
“We’ve had positive feedback about the engaging
format and compelling storylines of the videos,
along with the professional way that the leadership
distinction messages have been presented,” says
Jennifer Huth, who oversaw the implementation of
the program for McCain Foods.
Transmedia storytelling such as this leverages an
explosion of screens and devices to connect deeper
with a new generation of networked learners.
The amount of video viewed on tablet devices and
mobile phones in 2012 increased by 100 percent
over 2011, according to Ooyla’s Global Video Index.
Cisco expects that by 2016, two-thirds of worldwide
mobile data traffic will be video content. Xbox users
spend more time watching video than playing games
on the device. The epicenter of the video explosion
is YouTube, with a whopping one billion visitors per
month, according to YouTube statistics.
Gamification and 3D Virtual Worlds
Gamification has been a buzzword in the business
and L&D communities for the last several years. A
new generation has grown up with online games.
They thrive on the sense of engagement, storytelling,
character identification, immersion, problem solving,
and feeling of accomplishment offered by games.
But gaming cuts across ages. In fact, 26 percent
of gamers are over 50 years old, according to the
Entertainment Software Association—an increase
from just 9 percent in 1999. While it’s hard to
dispute the popularity of games, it’s becoming
equally difficult to dispute their instructional value.
A meta-analysis, conducted at the University of
Colorado Denver, of 65 studies and 6,476 trainees
found computer-based simulation games to be
more effective than traditional approaches by any

8
EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/10/2018 9:48 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES
AN: 802227 ; Gronstedt, Anders, Ramos, Marc.; Learning Through Transmedia Storytelling
Account: undeloan.main.ehost

COPYRIGHT © ASTD

Learning Through Transmedia Storytelling

Copyright @ 2014. American Society for Training & Development.
All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.

measure, including 20 percent more effective in
task completion.
Games employ a number of storytelling formats.
Live-action videos break up the game play to advance
the plot and provide additional information. Games
taking place in a 3D-immersive virtual world take
storytelling another step. Participants move their
avatars, or digital alter egos, around a 3D world,
interacting with other people or with non-player
avatars controlled by a game engine. As people move
about, the sound and volume changes depending
on where they are—it’s sound and sight in 3-D.
The immersive environment keeps participants
completely focused on the task at hand.
Virtual worlds can provide virtual rehearsals for
role play communication skills. Loyalist College in
Ontario, Canada, found that virtual world role playing
increased the number of border agent students
who passed a final evaluation from 56 to 93 percent
in comparison to taking an exam in the classroom.
“You could see the students sitting straighter in
their chairs when their avatars got into a uniform,”
says Ken Hudson, managing director of Loyalist’s
Virtual World Design Centre. “They left the project
with a sense of accomplishment and one of having
participated in a real-world experience.”
In one of IBM’s virtual worlds, employees step into a
virtual elevator to practice their elevator pitch with
a chief information officer, or rehearse an important
client pitch in a conference room with IBM executives
playing the role of clients. In Avaya’s Virtual
Rehearsal Studio, on the AvayaLive Engage platform,
sales representatives take turns playing the role of
Julia Parker, the CIO of International University, and
the Avaya account rep, while other representatives
give feedback on the performance. These 3D
immersive environments allow learners to step into
the characters and create their own stories.

THE FUTURE OF STORYTELLING:
AUGMENTED AND
VIRTUAL REALITY
Tomorrow’s storytelling learning is wearable and
immersive. Two digital eyewear technologies are at the
forefront of this revolution:
•	 A new generation of glasses, such as Google Glass, display a
digital layer over the real world to augment reality. Users can
interact with the Internet through voice commands and watch
information hands-free.
•	 A new generation of goggles, such as the Oculus Rift, create
the sense of being in a virtual reality. A wide field of view and
head tracking makes users feel like they’re inside a digital
3D world.
These augmented and virtual reality displays continue
to revolutionize storytelling. Imagine emergency
response workers being able to practice scenarios and
see stories unfold while being completely immersed
in the simulation. Learners can experience lasting and
memorable stories through multiple senses. While
the concepts are not new, they are now becoming
affordable, mass-market products.
Are virtual reality and augmented reality becoming an
inevitable part of storytelling, or will they go the way of
the Segway—over-hyped products that are now used my
mall cops and tourists? Time will tell.

Viral Power of Transmedia Storytelling
Successful transmedia stories can go viral in an
organization, with the characters becoming part
of the culture. “The main characters of the video
Bob and Giselle became part of our vernacular, as
symbols of the old and the new approach to selling,”
says Pamela Conyngham, who oversaw the sales
training program when she worked for Optum, a
subsidiary of UnitedHealth Group.
COPYRIGHT © ASTD

EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/10/2018 9:48 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES
AN: 802227 ; Gronstedt, Anders, Ramos, Marc.; Learning Through Transmedia Storytelling
Account: undeloan.main.ehost

9

Learning Through Transmedia Storytelling

Copyright @ 2014. American Society for Training & Development.
All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.

AVAYA AND TRANSMEDIA STORYTELLING
One company embracing transmedia storytelling approaches that are native to new media channels is Avaya, a Fortune
500 global leader in business communications. The company’s sales leadership was faced with the challenge of validating
knowledge on critical skills in realistic simulated scenarios. The skills ranged from strategic account planning to sales
call preparation, and from presentation skills to product knowledge. The responsibility to assess primary sales skills fell
to Rhonda Duesterberg, global sales enablement senior manager. “Our solution was a series of spy-themed learning and
assessment games,” says Duesterberg. “Points, high-scoring lists, badges, levels, cut-scenes, and storytelling are used
to validate and reinforce sales skills.”
Each game opens with a fast-paced video trailer. The
“mission” is presented with a dramatic video by a
“commander” who introduces the challenge and the
hero, Cindy Carter. In one of the challenges, Avaya reps
hear how Cindy develops a value proposition for a global
financial service client while she’s being pursued by an
evil competitor. The story is told through live-action video
with actors, produced by a professional video crew. Each
decision point offers a teachable moment where the player
has to make the call. The sales rep playing the game
becomes part of the unfolding storyline rather than simply
a passive audience member.
Meanwhile, the narrative from the 2D video-based game
was also told in a 3D virtual world campus where sales reps
meet for office hours and coaching sessions. “A helicopter
that is used to rescue the hero in one of the games
appears in our AccelerateU 3D campus for sales reps,”
explains Michelle Bigham, program manager at Avaya, who
manages the development of the programs. Sales reps will
soon be able to teleport their avatars from a meeting or
coaching session in the immersive world to the helicopter
and then to the games. The virtual campus also features
the affable non-player character guide Professor Q, a not
so subtle James Bond reference that ties back to the spy theme of the games. The helicopter and Professor Q in the 3D
virtual world heighten learners’ understanding, enjoyment, and affection for the story that is told in a 2D game. Thus,
Avaya’s sales training organization is using new media to enhance reach and build learner engagement across platforms.

10
EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/10/2018 9:48 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES
AN: 802227 ; Gronstedt, Anders, Ramos, Marc.; Learning Through Transmedia Storytelling
Account: undeloan.main.ehost

COPYRIGHT © ASTD

Copyright @ 2014. American Society for Training & Development.
All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.

Learning Through Transmedia Storytelling

“People said, ‘I don’t want to be a Bob.’ The videos
created a buzz. People were looking forward in
anticipation of the next video module or podcast,”
says Conyngham. The storyline was launched with
a trailer on the screen at a sales meeting, and
relayed using television-style videos and audio
podcasts every week during a three-month period.
Each medium made its own contribution to the
development of a coherent transmedia story about
a new approach to selling, creating wider reach and
deeper engagement.
Over 150 sales staff members completed all 12 parts
of the transmedia story campaign, nearly reaching
100 percent of the target audience. A live event for
a similar amount of training would cost about
$2,000 per participant, for a total cost of $300,000.
United Healthcare saved about $150,000 by telling
a transmedia story instead.

THE TRAINER’S ROLE
Whether your role is a learning designer, facilitator,
or training manager, the use of transmedia storytelling
is not a radical departure from your core job and
duties, but it does mean that your role will take on
additional attributes and a new skill set. Rather than
building your training or organizational development
intervention as an event or time-bound set of activities,
a trainer must be prepared to adjust from traditional
facilitated structures to scenarios based on discovery,
allowing the participants to “get lost in the story.” This
requires adjusting your skills to experiment more with
new technologies, and to consistently challenge your
team, peers, and clients on innovative new practices to
increase learner engagement.
The Optum/UnitedHealth program, for example,
leveraged videos as both facilitated guidance and
case study. It weaved its story across many devices
rather than one main screen. Microsoft’s diversity
and inclusion program used mobile phones for team
scavenger hunts, and scanned QR codes for ongoing
feedback and a literal road map to win!
As you investigate new story structures for your
learning events, a tool that may influence your role
and skills is SAMR. The SAMR, or the Substitute,
Augmentation, Modification, and Redefinition, model
is a helpful way to understand how technology—and

its various incarnations—can impact instruction
and how it’s designed. SAMR was developed by Dr.
Ruben Puentedura. It is essentially a guide for when
and how to use a specific technology or transmedia
for learning.
For example, if you want to simply have students
perform the same task, but using technology,
substitution is your first logical consideration.
An example here includes learners submitting
responses using a Word or Google Apps document
rather than paper or a spoken summary. How
this affects your role as a trainer is that you must
understand the various submission or collaboration
features of a device or technology. In addition,
selecting the right technique requires more technical
depth and deeper multimedia proficiency.
The SAMR model next progresses to augmentation.
Here the technology serves as a more effective tool
for the same task. Google Forms may be used for
exams, or a shared Google Doc can be populated
in real time, and viewed by the class (physical or
virtual) as part of an open book exam. Modification
is the next level, and might include videotaping
students’ activities or perhaps their presentation;
video is then fed back to the class for peer review.
Finally with redefinition, technology is used as an
exclusive new means fully replacing a standard
learning practice. Gamification is a current trend
that completely redefines traditional events such
as competitive team-based learning.
Whether you are using more traditional design
practice such as ADDIE or opting for the SAMR
Model, your role providing learning programs and
interventions does not change. What does change
is the requirement to learn new skills that look
outside of the standard learning event or box—both
in the breadth of a course—where does the learning
actually start or end—and also the depth of the
learning—allowing learners to discover, branch
out, and go deeper on their own. This frequently
requires the coordination of a number of different
creative talents and vendors. It’s rare for a training
department to have the skills to develop live action
video, scribes, podcasts, games, 3D virtual worlds,
and dozens of other emerging media platforms.
Trainers frequently have to turn to outside resources
for these services. Transmedia storytelling offers

COPYRIGHT © ASTD

EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/10/2018 9:48 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES
AN: 802227 ; Gronstedt, Anders, Ramos, Marc.; Learning Through Transmedia Storytelling
Account: undeloan.main.ehost

11

Learning Through Transmedia Storytelling

new approaches to test breadth and depth, as well
as a new challenge to identify, adapt, and remove
standard boundaries of learning.

Copyright @ 2014. American Society for Training & Development.
All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.

WHAT’S YOUR STORY?
Most companies have a story. At the center of these
stories is usually a protagonist who makes a hero’s
journey. Everyone knows the stories of how Walt
Disney, Steve Jobs, Howard Schultz, and Elon Musk
beat insurmountable challenges and rose from the
ashes. These stories define Disney, Apple, Starbucks,
and Tesla. They are used to sell the brand and inspire
its employees.
Behind the mythical company stories are also
thousands of stories that can be used to improve
performance. Every product designer has a story of
how a new product idea came about. Every service
engineer has a story about fixing a problem that
averted a disaster. Every leader has a story about
empowering a team member and achieving great
success. At the core of every training challenge, no
matter how mundane, is a good story waiting to
be told.
Archetypical characters who express an idea while
being flawed and relatable tap into the deeper
relevant experience of the Hero’s Journey. Effective
storytelling requires a powerful plot with characters
who face adversity and go through a journey of
transformation. It has to be told in a fresh way with a
human voice and a sense of humor.
More and more, these stories are being told across
a multitude of devices and screens, where they can
reach learners more widely, and engage with them

more deeply. Because individuals outside of their
work day are using technology more and more for
enjoyment, to connect, and for developing “nonwork” skills, it is increasingly critical that we as
learning professionals leverage that technology to
reach our trainees.
And because storytelling is at the heart of
understanding, memory, and learning, we should
also tie new technologies to stories to take the
learner on a hero’s journey of growth, wisdom, and
mastery. In this Infoline, you’ve seen companies
that used technology so well that characters have
become a part of the workplace. You’ve also seen
examples of test scores radically improving through
the use of avatars and a virtual world.
While not every training course lends itself to
transmedia storytelling, you can begin simply
by following the SAMR Model and substituting a
media platform for more traditional pen and paper
instruction elements.
Telling your story through the transmedia framework
will build upon your current L&D skills and also take
you as a trainer on a journey of your own.
Memory is the process of creating, storing, and
retrieving stories. The more indexes, the more
comparisons to prior experiences, the better
the learning experience will be. This is the most
critical and intrinsic device and advice to leverage
in this Infoline. The more we can index timeless and
durable structures and their interrelationship with
human nature—the greater the marvel, acquisition,
and adoption.

12
EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/10/2018 9:48 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES
AN: 802227 ; Gronstedt, Anders, Ramos, Marc.; Learning Through Transmedia Storytelling
Account: undeloan.main.ehost

COPYRIGHT © ASTD

Learning Through Transmedia Storytelling

Copyright @ 2014. American Society for Training & Development.
All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.

REFERENCES & RESOURCES

Books:
Campbell, J. (2008). The Hero with a

Articles:
Fiorelli, G. “Transmedia Storytelling:

Thousand Faces, [3rd Ed.] Novato,

Building Worlds For and With Fans.”

CA. New World Library.

April 23, 2013 www.moz.com.

Gottschall, J. (2012). The Storytelling

Gronstedt, A. “Transmedia Storytelling

Animal: How Stories Make Us Human.

for the Netflix Age.” T+D Magazine.

New York, NY: Houghton Mifflin

August 8, 2013.

Harcourt Publishing.
Jenkins, H., S. Ford, and J. Green.
(2013). Spreadable Media: Creating
Value and Meaning in a Networked
Culture. New York, NY: NYU Press.
Phillips, A. (2012). A Creator’s Guide to
Transmedia Storytelling. New York,
NY: McGraw Hill.

Jenkins, H. “Transmedia Storytelling.”
January 15, 2003 www.
technologyreview.com.
Kopp, I. “15 Things I’ve Learned about
Transmedia Storytelling.” October 14,
2013 www.indiewire.com.
Sachdeva, D. “Digital Storytelling 101.”
June 27, 2013 www.astd.org.

Sachs, J. (2012). Winning the Story
Wars. Boston, MA: Harvard Business
Review Press.
Smith, P. (2012). Lead With a Story.
New York, NY: AMACOM.

Infoline:
Lee, D. (2012) “Powerful Storytelling
Techniques.” Infoline. Alexandria,
VA: ASTD Press.

Vogler, C. (2007). The Writer’s Journey:
Mythic Structure for Writers, [3rd
Ed.]. Studio City, CA: Michael
Wiese Productions.

Blogs:
Henry Jenkins: http://henryjenkins.
org/2007/03/transmedia_
storytelling_101.html
Kevin Moloney: http://
transmediajournalism.
org/2012/11/06/transmediajournalism-in-499-words/

COPYRIGHT © ASTD

EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/10/2018 9:48 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES
AN: 802227 ; Gronstedt, Anders, Ramos, Marc.; Learning Through Transmedia Storytelling
Account: undeloan.main.ehost

13

JOB AID

Copyright @ 2014. American Society for Training & Development.
All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.

TIPS FOR DESIGNING TRANSMEDIA LEARNING
Using the case studies provided in this Infoline, as well as your experience with instructional design and technology, consider
what media platforms might be appropriate for each of the 12 steps in the Hero’s Journey framework and accompanying
learning challenge.

Hero’s Journey Step

Learning Challenge or Element

Ordinary World

•	 In the Ordinary World, convincing
employees that they need training,
especially with busy schedules and
ever-changing priorities.
•	 Is there buy-in for committing to the
time for training?

Call to Adventure

•	 Is the Call to Adventure clearly
setting course expectations?
•	 Are we properly igniting and exciting
the real benefits of performance or
behavioral change?

Refusal of the Call

•	 Where do learners hesitate
knowing how difficult the learning
requirements will be?
•	 Is there reluctance based on
pre-course assessments and the
acceptance of a learning gap?

Meeting With the Mentor

•	 Is there a strong facilitator?
•	 Does the introduction of a case study
benchmark best practices?

Crossing the First Threshold

•	 The trainee begins to embrace the
need for training and is ready to make
the commitment to begin the learning
process.

14

How could this be shown through
transmedia elements?

ASTD Press grants permission for the material on this page to be reproduced for personal use.

EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/10/2018 9:48 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES
AN: 802227 ; Gronstedt, Anders, Ramos, Marc.; Learning Through Transmedia Storytelling
Account: undeloan.main.ehost

Copyright @ 2014. American Society for Training & Development.
All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.

Hero’s Journey Step

Learning Challenge or Element

Tests, Allies, and Enemies

•	 How does the addition of work teams,
group projects, or related breakout
activities help learning?

The Approach

•	 How is learning facilitated with
teaming or reflecting with others?
•	 Do you incorporate rehearsals in
front of a video camera and show
that practice is required?

The Ordeal

•	 How does the final exam
show learning?
•	 Is there an ultimate
panel presentation?
•	 Do learners submit a project?

Reward

•	 What is the benefit to the employee?
•	 Are there tangible “prizes”?

Road Back/Resurrection

•	 What is the journey of the course?
•	 Or have you now returned to your
regular job with the true test of
applying what you’ve learned?
•	 Are you considering post-training
support?

Return With the Elixir

•	 Have learners attained mastery?
How do you know?
•	 Has a 360-degree survey been
conducted with your team
and manager?
•	 Have you reviewed any shrinkage of
knowledge gaps via a Level 3 posttraining assessment?
•	 Have you gained that credential
or certification by successfully
completing X hours of post-training
field or project work?

How could this be shown through
transmedia elements?

ASTD Press grants permission for the material on this page to be reproduced for personal use.
EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/10/2018 9:48 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES
AN: 802227 ; Gronstedt, Anders, Ramos, Marc.; Learning Through Transmedia Storytelling
Account: undeloan.main.ehost

15

JOB AID

Copyright @ 2014. American Society for Training & Development.
All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.

LEARNERS’ ARC ALIGNMENT EXERCISE
Identifying your learners’ readiness for growth and challenge is a first step to aligning your training to a Hero’s Journey
structure. Take any existing course or one in progress and use this table to realign your learning objectives. Challenge the
existing progression of your course by rearranging the flow (for example, try a “flashback” model). This exercise is not
intended to be a detailed redesign, but a challenge to traditional thinking and ideally a new way to think about indexing story
with instruction.
Vogler’s Character Arc

Associated Learning Objectives

Learning Flow (Orientation,
Problem, Solution, Conclusion)

Limited Awareness of Problem

Increased Awareness

Reluctance to Change

Overcoming Reluctance

Committing to Change

Experimenting With First Change

Preparing for Big Change

Attempting Big Change

Consequences of the Attempt

Rededication to Change

Final Attempt at Big Change

Final Mastery of the Problem

16

ASTD Press grants permission for the material on this page to be reproduced for personal use.

EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/10/2018 9:48 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES
AN: 802227 ; Gronstedt, Anders, Ramos, Marc.; Learning Through Transmedia Storytelling
Account: undeloan.main.ehost

Issues mail in January, April, July, and October

Learning and Development
Issues mail in February, May, August, and November

Human Capital
Issues mail in March, June, September, and December

021127.62220

Copyright @ 2014. American Society for Training & Development.
All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.

Learning Technologies

Pick your favorite topic and subscribe today!
www.astd.org/infoline

EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/10/2018 9:48 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES
AN: 802227 ; Gronstedt, Anders, Ramos, Marc.; Learning Through Transmedia Storytelling
Account: undeloan.main.ehost

Copyright @ 2014. American Society for Training & Development.
All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.

ISBN 978-1-56286-951-9

TEXT PRINTED ON
10% RECYCLED FIBER

EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/10/2018 9:48 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES
AN: 802227 ; Gronstedt, Anders, Ramos, Marc.; Learning Through Transmedia Storytelling
Account: undeloan.main.ehost

9 781562 869519
251401	

111351.62410

52495

