We use cookies to offer you a better browsing experience, analyze
site traffic, personalize content, and serve targeted advertisements.
Read about how we use cookies and how you can control them by
clicking "Cookie Settings." If you continue to use this site, you
consent to our use of cookies.

› Cookie Settings

Rewriting Life

Transmedia Storytelling
Moving characters from books to films to video games can make them stronger
and more compelling.
by Henry Jenkins



January 15, 2003











Several years ago, I asked a leading producer of animated features how
much creative control his team exerted over the games, toys, comics, and
other products that deployed their characters. I was reassured that the
distribution company handled all such ancillary materials. I saw the
movement of content across media as an enhancement of the creative
process. He saw it as a distraction or corruption.
This past month, I attended a gathering of top creatives from Hollywood
and the games industry, hosted by Electronic Arts; they were discussing how
to collaboratively develop content that would play well across media. This
meeting reflected a growing realization within the media industries that
what is variously called transmedia, multiplatform, or enhanced storytelling
represents the future of entertainment.
Let’s face it: we have entered an era of media convergence that makes the

flow of content across multiple media channels almost inevitable. The move
toward digital effects in film and the improved quality of video game
graphics means that it is becoming much more realistic to lower production
costs by sharing assets across media. Everything about the structure of the
modern entertainment industry was designed with this single idea in mindthe construction and enhancement of entertainment franchises.
And the push isn’t just coming from the big media companies. The kids who
have grown up consuming and enjoying Pokemon across media are going to
expect this same kind of experience from The West Wing as they get older.
By design, Pokemon unfolds across games, television programs, films, and
books, with no media privileged over any other. For our generation, the
hour-long, ensemble-based, serialized drama was the pinnacle of
sophisticated storytelling, but for the next generation, it is going to seem,
well, like less than child’s play. Younger consumers have become information
hunters and gatherers, taking pleasure in tracking down character
backgrounds and plot points and making connections between different
texts within the same franchise. And in addition, all evidence suggests that
computers don’t cancel out other media; instead, computer owners consume
on average significantly more television, movies, CDs, and related media
than the general population.
While the technological infrastructure is ready, the economic prospects
sweet, and the audience primed, the media industries haven’t done a very
good job of collaborating to produce compelling transmedia experiences.
Even within the media conglomerates, units compete aggressively rather
than collaborate. Each industry sector has specialized talent, but the
conglomerates lack a common language or vision to unify them. The current
structure is hierarchical: film units set licensing limits on what can be done
in games based on their properties. At the same time, film producers don’t
know the game market very well or respect those genre elements which
made something like Tomb Raider successful. We need a new model for co-

creation-rather than adaptation-of content that crosses media.
The current licensing system typically generates works that are redundant
(allowing no new character background or plot development), watered
down (asking the new media to slavishly duplicate experiences better
achieved through the old), or riddled with sloppy contradictions (failing to
respect the core consistency audiences expect within a franchise). These
failures account for why sequels and franchises have a bad reputation.
Nobody wants to consume a steady diet of second-rate novelizations!
Franchise products are governed too much by economic logic and not
enough by artistic vision. Hollywood acts as if it only has to provide more of
the same, printing a Star Treklogo on so many widgets. In reality, audiences
want the new work to offer new insights into the characters and new
experiences of the fictional world. If media companies reward that demand,
viewers will feel greater mastery and investment; deny it and they stomp off
in disgust.
So far, the most successful transmedia franchises have emerged when a
single creator or creative unit maintains control over the franchise.
Hollywood might well study the ways that Lucasfilm has managed and
cultivated its Indiana Jones and Star Wars franchises. When Indiana Jones
went to television, for example, it exploited the medium’s potential for
extended storytelling and character development: the Young Indiana Jones
Chronicles showed us the character take shape against the backdrop of
various historical events and exotic environments. When Star Wars moved
into print, its novels expanded the timeline to show us events not contained
in the film trilogies, or recast the stories around secondary characters, as did
the Tales of the Cantina series, which fleshes out those curious-looking
aliens in the background of the original movie. When Star Wars went to
games, those games didn’t just enact film events; they showed us what life
would be like for a Jedi trainee or a bounty hunter.

On the other end of the scale, independent filmmaker Kevin Smith (Chasing
Amy, Clerks), a longtime comic fan, uses this lower cost medium to fill in
gaps and extend character background within his New Jersey film series.
Joss Whedon, the creator of Buffy the Vampire Slayer, similarly uses comics
to extend his storyline backwards (Tales of the Slayers) and forward (Fray)
in time, depicting huge spans in the history of the Watcher’s Council and the
Slayers. Sony used the Web to offer new insights into the characters of
Dawson’s Creek, mimicking the title character’s desktop, so that we can read
his e-mail, sneak a peek at his journals, or even plagiarize his school essays.
A team of writers updated this content each week in response to the aired
episodes, using the Web to both plant seeds for future plot development and
provide background to remind viewers of past actions.
In the ideal form of transmedia storytelling, each medium does what it does
best-so that a story might be introduced in a film, expanded through
television, novels, and comics, and its world might be explored and
experienced through game play. Each franchise entry needs to be selfcontained enough to enable autonomous consumption. That is, you don’t
need to have seen the film to enjoy the game and vice-versa. As Pokemon
does so well, any given product is a point of entry into the franchise as a
whole.
Reading across the media sustains a depth of experience that motivates
more consumption. In a world with many media options, consumers are
choosing to invest deeply in a limited number of franchises rather than dip
shallowly into a larger number. Increasingly, gamers spend most of their
time and money within a single genre, often a single franchise. We can see
the same pattern in other media-films (high success for certain franchises,
overall declines in revenue), television (shorter spans for most series, longer
runs for a few), or comics (incredibly long runs for a limited number of
superhero icons). Redundancy between media burns up fan interest and

causes franchises to fail. Offering new levels of insight and experience
refreshes the franchise and sustains consumer loyalty. Such a multilayered
approach to storytelling will enable a more complex, more sophisticated,
more rewarding mode of narrative to emerge within the constraints of
commercial entertainment.
And it also makes economic sense. Different media attract different market
niches. Films and television probably have the most diverse audiences,
comics and games the narrowest. A good transmedia franchise attracts a
wider audience by pitching the content differently in the different media. If
each work offers fresh experiences, then a crossover market will expand the
potential gross within any individual media. So, women may not play games,
but women who like Lord of the Rings might experiment on a related game
title.
Have no fear-not all stories will flow across media. Most won’t, but a
growing number will. Transmedia stories aren’t necessarily bad stories; they
are different kinds of stories. According to Hollywood lore, a good pitch
starts with either a compelling character or an interesting world. We might,
from there, make the following argument: A good character can sustain
multiple narratives and thus lead to a successful movie franchise. A good
“world” can sustain multiple characters (and their stories) and thus
successfully launch a transmedia franchise.
Many of our best authors, from William Faulkner to J.R.R. Tolkien,
understood their art in terms of world-creation and developed rich
environments which could, indeed, support a variety of different characters.
For most of human history, it would be taken for granted that a great story
would take many different forms, enshrined in stain glass windows or
tapestries, told through printed words or sung by bards and poets, or
enacted by traveling performers. Sequels aren’t inherently bad-remember
that Huckleberry Finn was a sequel to Tom Sawyer. But Twain understood

what modern storytellers seem to have forgotten-a compelling sequel offers
consumers a new perspective on the characters, rather than just more of the
same.

Become an MIT Technology Review Insider for in-depth
analysis and unparalleled perspective.
Subscribe today

Related Video

More videos

AI for Personalized Health Care 22:27

More from Rewriting Life
Reprogramming our bodies to make us healthier.

01

The first “social network” of brains lets three people transmit thoughts to
each other’s heads
BrainNet allows collaborative problem-solving using direct brain-to-brain communication.
by Emerging Technology from the arXiv

stretchy stick-on patch can take blood pressure readings from deep
02 Ainside
your body
The flexible stamp can collect data that usually requires bulky, invasive equipment.
by Rachel Metz

out old cells might help the brain
03 Clearing
A popular anti-aging strategy keeps mice from getting senile.
by Karen Weintraub

More from Rewriting Life

Want more award-winning journalism? Subscribe to
Insider Online Only.

Insider Online Only $9.99/3 months
Unlimited online access including articles and video, plus The Download with the top tech
stories delivered daily to your inbox.

Subscribe
See details+

*Prices are for U.S. residents only
See international prices

