Hybrid stories
Examining the future of transmedia narrative
Tom Abba
Among recent examples of long-form sf drama, there can be observed an increasing tendency
to extend the broadcast story across multiple narrative platforms. The web, mobile telephony
and print media are recombined with established broadcast platforms to produce a form of
storytelling that interleaves online and offline experiences. While this participatory creation
of story suits a technologically savvy contemporary audience, why has multimedia storytelling
consistently sought to explore sf themes? Through an examination of the narrative mechanics
at work within transmedia storytelling, this article explores the relationship between sf and new
media, particularly with regard to the emergence of Alternate Reality Gaming since 2001.

Multiplatform media

In his review of Southland Tales (Kelly Germany/US/France 2006), The Guardian’s John Patterson argues that its
ideal viewer is a kid with a laptop, an iPod, a full complement of cable/satellite TV options,
a NetFlix subscription, a TiVo hard drive packed with recorded shows, a taste for online
gaming within ridiculously detailed game-universes and open-ended game narratives,
a demon for channel-surfing and an encyclopedic knowledge of pop-culture. In that kid’s
mind – and really, in all of our minds these days – narratives are not confined to the medium they were born in; they are part of the larger collage that we all construct from the fragments of everything we watch, read, hear and surf. (6)

Patterson carefully avoids offering any indication as to whether the future of
cinema offered by Southland Tales is one he himself would like to experience,
but that future is, nevertheless, increasingly part of our present. The collage of
narrative Patterson finds evident in Kelly’s multiplatform story – a film released
in 2007,1 three antecedent chapters of which were serialised as graphic novels;
a website which deepens the scenario;2 and a central narrative which requires
1.  After a substantial re-edit following a disastrous premiere sixteen months earlier at the Cannes
Film Festival.
2.  Unlike Kelly’s previous feature, Donnie Darko (US 2001), the website built for Southland Tales displays little of the supporting narrative material as was assembled for his debut feature. To date, the
site at <http://www.southlandtales.com/openingframesetloader1.html> still suggests that the content
is forthcoming.
Science Fiction Film and Television  2.1 (2009), 59–76

ISSN 1754-3770 (print)  1754-3789 (online)

©  LUP

60	

Tom Abba

Southland Tales. Sony Pictures.

familiarity with the Book of Revelations and the poetry of Robert Frost in order
to be accurately ‘read’ – might seem strange to the casual viewer, but to sf film
and television audiences such strategies have become increasingly commonplace. The genre is perhaps the primary site in which to observe the emergence
of the possible future form of narrative. In addition to Southland Tales, television series such as Alias (US 2001–2006), Lost (US 2004– ), Battlestar Galactica
(US 2004– ), Heroes (US 2006– ) and Terminator: The Sarah Connor Chronicles
(US 2008– ), and films such as The Matrix (Wachowski brothers Australia/US
1999) and A. I.: Artificial Intelligence (Spielberg US 2001) have been supported,
officially and otherwise, by online interactive narrative experiences. Collectively, these ‘extended narrative’ elements fall into a category known as ‘Alternate
Reality Games’ (ARGs). In an ARG, the narrative reality of these source storyworlds is taken as genuine, and website material and real-world interactions
combine with filmed media to produce a form that responds to player interaction, becoming, when employed successfully, both an adjunct to the original
and a multimedia narrative experience in its own right.
	 Throughout the relatively short history of new media theory, its practitioners have become preoccupied with modelling the shape of the emergent
new media ecology. While appreciating that proper investigation of these
constitutes a  study in itself, is it nevertheless useful to consider some of the
common elements identified in academic study of digital technologies since
the late 1980s. Lev Manovich posited a  conception of new media objects as

	

Hybrid stories	

61

‘those using a computer for distribution and exhibition above only production’
(22), proposing that these artefacts can be identified as possessing: ‘numerical representation’, ‘modularity’, ‘automation’, ‘variability’ and ‘cultural transcoding’. Mark Deuze suggests that ‘participation’, ‘remediation’ and ‘bricolage’
each exert differential pressure on a digital continuum. Arguably representing
the most comprehensive survey of the field to date, Martin Lister, Jon Dovey,
Seth Giddings, Iain Grant and Keiran Kelly’s New Media: A Critical Introduction identifies five key characteristics of new media: ‘digitality’, ‘interactivity’,
‘hypertextuality’, ‘dispersal’ and ‘virtuality’. The terminology used by each of
these models is indicative of the dual nature of the thinking prevalent in the
field. Experimental new media forms are feted by academia, technophiles and
wider cultural theory, in many cases justifiably so. The emergence of Web 2.0
– the implicitly participatory user-led culture of blogging, YouTube and so
on – is a significant step forward in terms of empowerment. Nevertheless, the
language used to describe these changes is rooted in the critical frameworks
of the media forms that preceded them. Echoing film’s early classification as
‘moving pictures’, this iteration of new media is also defined by its relationship
to previous forms. For example, the notion of ‘citizen journalism’ presupposes
that blogging is most appropriately defined by reference to journalistic practice.
This problematic situation is compounded by the tendency of mass media to
appropriate terminology and communicate it to a disparate audience. Critical
analysis of new media, as a  result, is engaged in a  constant struggle to keep
pace with an emergent technological ecology.
	 Common to each of the terminologies/models outlined above, though, is an
appreciation that digital media offer the potential for content to be transposed
from their original form and be reconstituted to new ends in a networked ecology. New Media’s ‘dispersal’ explicitly addresses such shifts in our relationship
to both consumption and production of new media texts. Deuze’s ‘bricolage’
– ‘an assemblage and tweaking of multiple good copies over a  single bad original’ (70) – identifies the specific manner by which new media favour a multiplicity of voices (a digital version of an iteration of Mikhail Bakhtin’s notion
of ‘multivocality’). Most profound of all these proposals is Manovich’s ‘cultural
transcoding’, the means by which the conventions of the Human–Computer
Interface itself – ‘what can be called the computer’s ontology, epistemology,
and pragmatics’ – ‘influence the cultural layer of new media, its organisation,
its emerging genres, its contents’ (46). Manovich identifies the existence of
a  media-specific digital ecology, proposing that the medium should be considered as a distinct form of communication, rather than reliant on the remediated language of cinema. This moves beyond the frame in which Richard

62	

Tom Abba

Grusin’s remediative interactive model operates,3 although his suggestion that
digital cinema is simply the ‘remediation of an already mediated world’ (71)
will impact on my discussion below.
Narrative form and content

Nicknamed The Beast by its creators, the first recognisable ARG was conceived
as a promotional tool for A.I.: Artificial Intelligence. It drew upward of 10,000
players from around the world into a mystery set in the film’s fictional future.
Websites presented the story, a  participatory narrative comprised of scripted
elements, email messages, video clips and puzzles. Since then, dozens of ARGs
have played out over the Internet. Many of them are associated with a major
media release, while others have been developed and released independently.
Within seven years, the format has matured and acquired distinct qualities and
subgenres. Those ARGs which draw explicitly on an existing source – significantly, these are predominantly sf narratives – are generally regarded by devotees as perhaps less interesting than so-called ‘grassroots’ ARGs because their
commercial funding constrains aspects of the form’s potential. Nevertheless,
such ARGS do attract a wider audience and provide an effective snapshot of
how the genre has developed since 2001.
	 While The Beast appears relatively immature by today’s standards, its technical elements forecast much of what followed in the field. Set fifty years after
the events of Spielberg’s film, it presented a murder mystery within an sf setting,
drawing on the tropes of film noir thrillers and other recognisable film forms
in order to produce a  consistent world environment. Players interacted with
characters, emailing and telephoning remote locations and unknown addresses
in order to uncover the truth of an unsolved, and unnoticed, murder. At the
end of the game’s twelve-week run4 the players had discovered thirty websites
central to the unfolding plotline, and had cracked puzzles and mysteries whose
solutions required them to draw on knowledge as varied as binary software
encryption and the tablature specific to lute music.
	 Following The Beast’s success, ARGs began to spring up to promote the
release of computer games, films and television series. Independent, grassrootsfunded games started to appear, too, and the majority of these fan-built constructions, such as LockJaw (2001), Majestic (2001) and Perplex City (2005), also
3.  See, for example, Jenkins.
4.  ARGs are, to date, time-based, constrained within a specific period of play. Attempts to manufacture a ‘standalone’, re-playable ARG have so far been unsuccessful.

	

Hybrid stories	

63

drew on sf tropes and settings. It is possible that the technological nature of the
new media shepherded the form to this genre – it was, after all, the cyberpunk
sf of William Gibson and others in the 1980s that provided the dominant mode
of imagining the internet and interactions with digital information, with a clear
impact on software and systems designers. Of greater interest here, though, is
the degree to which ARGs and contemporary sf film and television have echoed
each other’s development and reception.
	 The next ARG tied to the release of a major movie was Metacortechs, which
drew on the fictional universe of the Matrix trilogy and played out during
October and November 2003. The entry point for the narrative purported to
be the website of Metacortex Inc., the software company for which Thomas
Anderson/Neo (Keanu Reeves) worked at the start of The Matrix. The main
plot – involving a  mysterious disappearance, corporate intrigue, jealous exlovers, the hint of a beta-Matrix in development – proved complex and interesting enough to attract up to 800 actively involved players and in excess of
100,000 observers. As is typical in ARGs, uncovering plot points required
a  high degree of technical knowledge to crack ASCII-based clues, hack websites and construct patterns from seemingly unrelated events and coincidences. Notably for a  fiction based within an established ‘universe’, and one that
demonstrates Roger Caillois’s four stages of immersive play,5 players made
careful effort not to break the fourth wall between the characters and the real
world. While the word-of-mouth power of Metacortechs was rooted in its
players’ knowledge of the universe of The Matrix trilogy, its characters had no
knowledge that their reality was a fiction and, indeed, were engaged in their
first steps toward uncovering that knowledge. This positioning of the reader
with regard to the narrative object is peculiar to an interactive, participatory
form. While Henry Jenkins, arguing that participatory transmedia narratives
are capable of operation without a principal, ur-text, proposes The Matrix as
a  model of decentralised narrative structure (103–4), the game itself relied
upon a  foregrounded knowledge of the films to attract its players/audience.
Indeed, the boundaries between textual forms have not so much collapsed (in
the case of those ARGs drawing on a  primary text) as offered new opportu5.  Roger Caillois’s definition of the types of play in which society engages develops earlier research by
Johan Huizinga, who argued that play is not an ephemeral, inconsequential activity, but an essential,
perhaps central factor in civilization (see Lister el al. 269). Caillois’ taxonomy includes Agon (competitive play, found in sports and games such as chess), Alea (play defined by its reliance on chance, as in
gambling), Mimicry (simulation and roleplay, as well as the pleasure of acting and watching performance) and Ilinx (often referred to as vertigo; the thrill of the theme park ride, the willing inducement
of disorder, fear, shock and a ‘change to the rules of reality’ (Caillois 25).

64	

Tom Abba

nities to cross-fertilise ideas and narrative objects between forms and audiences and allowed that audience to step inside the world-building process (see
Ornebring 448).
	 Early in 2006, Dan Hill, the Director of Web & Broadcast at Tyler Brûlé’s
Monocle6 described the emergence of ABC’s Lost as a  meta-level new media
artefact, arguing that ‘the amount of content produced about your content
should be of far greater weight than the originating content itself. This in turn
creates a  new kind of content, forged from a  social process of collaboration
with users, viewers, listeners’ (Hill). While Lost’s ability to generate independent content was reliant on the textual information present within the ongoing
series, its considerable – and devoted – audience established it as a  centre
from which ‘ripples’ spread across the new media landscape. The TV series’
deployment of the ARG format comprised a  lengthy series of narrative puzzles and subplots featuring the shadowy Hanso Foundation, the pursuit of
which eventually revealed to its players the purpose of the ‘numbers’ featured
heavily in the series’ first and second seasons. Players were required to engage
with web-broadcast material, assist characters in their search for answers and
uncover material as a  collective in order to advance the narrative, a  process
that required five months of activity until the conclusion of the game was
reached.
	 The entry points (or ‘rabbit holes’) into ARGs such as Metacortechs and those
related to Heroes, Lost and Battlestar Galactica resonate strongly with the defamiliarising process of ‘conceptual breakthrough’ in sf literature. Peter Nicholls
writes:
All the most exciting scientific revolutions have taken the form of breaking down a paradigm and substituting another. Such an altered perception of the world, sometimes in terms
of science and sometimes in terms of society, is what sf is most commonly about, and few sf
stories do not have at least some aspect of conceptual breakthrough. (255)

Compare this with Dave Szulborski’s description of ARG rabbit holes: ‘A good
rabbit hole needs to appear realistic ... if done right, the player doesn’t even
know that a game has begun, and that he is already playing it. As it progresses,
the game eventually reveals more and more of its “reality”’ (65). While Nicholls
identifies sf as a  literary form that commonly works to alter its reader’s perception, revealing a ‘truer’ reality behind the curtain of the world, Szulborksi
suggests that the ARG story form is designed to subvert each reader’s/player’s
perception of reality.
6.  See <http://www.monocle.com/>. Hill maintains a  blog covering cultural developments in new
media at <http://www.cityofsound.com/>.

	

Hybrid stories	

65

Four-stage ARG structure
Stage one

rabbit hole

Stage two

things are not quite as they seem

Stage three

we enter and engage with the new world

Stage four

truths are discovered, wrongs are made right

Figure 1.  Four-stage ARG model (author’s own). After Szulborski et al.

	 Nicholls offers a number of examples to illustrate his discussion, among them
John Fowles’ The Magus (1966). Although not obviously sf, Fowles’ novel nevertheless comprises a series of conceptual breakthroughs, each new truth seen in
turn to be as inadequate an explanation for the events of the story as was the
previous one, until the nihilistic and ultimate reality is revealed at the book’s
close. The structure of The Magus, replete with psychodramatic revelations, represents a continued erection and collapse of identity and, ultimately, narrative
reality, even as it also implies – in common with other sf narrative structures
and strategies – a desire on the part of the author to build worlds. To suggest
that this pattern of successive revelations offers a model not only for ARGS but
also for many of the primary texts upon which they draw – such as The Matrix,
Battlestar Galactica or Lost – appears self-evident.
	 That sf should have become the default content of ARGs is in some ways
unsurprising. If it is the case as Charles Olson argues, that ‘Form is never more
than an extension of content’ (1),7 it can be argued that the form of the ARG
is constrained within a set of principles (those of sf) that shape it insofar as its
content (conversely) can only exist as an extension of that form. Consequently,
just as sf is defined, according to Nicholls at least, in terms of conceptual breakthrough, so the structure of an ARG is one of nested conceptual breakthroughs,
of reality remade by the act of participation, of exploring the rabbit hole and
desiring to see what lies beyond, to see what the world has become. Therefore,
even though The Beast, Metacortechs, The Lost Experience and the Alias ARG all
fall into explore–reveal–engage–complete stages, it is unlikely that this is solely
a result of their reliance on a primary source (see Figure 1).
	 Sf, as a forward-looking genre committed to examination and proposition,
ought to be ideally suited to nurturing a new storytelling form. John Clute, in
his review of William Gibson’s Pattern Recognition (2003), identifies within
7.  Olson, who is quoting Robery Creeley, is describing ‘projective verse’. Analysing the Black Mountain poets’ compositional style, he writes, ‘A poem is energy transferred from where the poet got it (he
will have some several causations), by way of the poem itself to, all the way over to, the reader.’

66	

Tom Abba

Gibson’s text the same transmedia phenomenon John Patterson would later
glimpse in Southland Tales:
It would be inappropriate – this early in the life of the book – to strip the latter parts of
the story wide open; but this can be said. All 135 sequences of the footage [film fragments
released anonymously on the internet by the ‘Garage Kubrick’] to date are numbered steganographically – that is, through a complex process of ‘digital watermarking’ which must
be deciphered to be read – in a  pattern that seems unmistakably to represent the map
of some urban area. That the pattern is in fact not a city map, that it is in fact something
whose implications wrench the heart, the reader will discover. For the pattern, and the
story embedded in the pattern, and the maker of the pattern, are one. Together, they are the
wound of the world doing story.  (405)

The conflation of media forms to facilitate new demands and new audiences
is a feature of most modern fiction forms – postmodernist practice practically
insists upon it – but it is particularly evident in the sf of the late 1980s onward.
The emergence of a multimedia culture, magnified through the existence of the
web, cannot but impact on popular fiction. Sf is where that impact is felt most
keenly and, particularly within audiovisual sf, the opportunities afforded by
mixing media have been seized upon. Bearing closer examination, though, are
the specific qualities multiplatform narratives bring and the means by which to
understand them.
	 It seems, in 2009, that if the boundaries between genres of fiction are not
collapsing, then the genres themselves are being conflated. Buffy The Vampire
Slayer (US 1997–2003) blurred fantasy, horror and sf tropes, while The Matrix
submerged sf in Baudrillardian postmodern theory. Heroes draws on the pantheon of superhero comics in print since the mid-1930s, along with serial killer
and conspiracy thrillers, with an eye to near-future and post-apocalyptic sf
scenarios. Close reading of specific narrative arcs in the rebooted Battlestar
Galactica draw allegories to the Iraq war and the treatment of political prisoners in detention around the world today. Gary K. Wolfe’s identification of
a  dissolutionist strategy at work within contemporary sf finds its expression
in a range of work by authors, including Connie Willis, Jack Dann, Greg Bear,
Gregory Benford and Sherri S. Tepper, whom he characterises as ‘writing science fiction without writing in the genre of science fiction’ (‘Evaporating’ 18),
and others, including Jonathan Lethem, Jonathan Carroll, Paul Auster, Paul
di Filippo, Stepan Chapman and Elizabeth Hand, as having ‘moved even farther along the postgenre path’ (‘Evaporating’ 28).8 Similar tendencies can be
8.  See also Wolfe (‘Malebolge’) and Vint and Bould.

	

Hybrid stories	
Fantasy

Science fiction

Horror

Phase one

wrongness

novum

sighting

Phase two

thinning

cognitive estrangement

thickening

Phase three

recognition

conceptual breakthrough

revel

Phase four

return

topia (u- or dys-)

aftermath

67

Figure 2.  Four-stage narrative grammars (Clute).

found in, for example, Alan Moore’s postmodern reworking of the superhero mythology in Watchmen (1985), Joss Whedon’s intertextual Buffy, Darren
Aronofsky’s fantasy/psychological thriller π (US 1998) and Pixar’s reworking
of Watchmen’s superheroics in The Incredibles (Bird US 2004). John Clute, who
has also drawn attention to this dissolution of boundaries, suggests that postEnlightenment fiction that draws on the fantastic – and which has commonly
been categorised over the last century as sf, fantasy or horror – has been reaching toward this merged conclusion for some time. In ‘Fantastika in the World
Storm’, he proposes four-phase ‘narrative grammars’ for stories in each of these
genres (see Figure 2).
	 He argues that these genres can be seen as ‘permutations of one Ur Story,
like three snakes mutually entwined, each snake undergoing the same morphological transforms’, and that while ‘the first three phases make up a progress of
story’, the fourth phases ‘represents places Story can only point at, like Moses’
(12). Clute’s grammars map, albeit imperfectly, onto each other and his sf grammar can also be imprecisely mapped onto the four-stage structure of the ARG
experience outlined above (see Figure 3).
	 Because an ARG only becomes an ARG when it is played, the role of constructing a life beyond the text – in that place to which Story points – falls to
the player.
ARG structure
rabbit hole

Sf’s narrative grammar
the aspect of the world differ-

novum

ing measurably from our own
things are not quite as they

a process of structured defa-

seem

miliarisation

we enter and engage with the

the collapse of one paradigm

new world

and the emergence of another

truths are discovered, wrongs

consequences

cognitive estrangement
conceptual breakthrough
topia (u- or dys-)

are made right
Figure 3.  Four-stage narrative grammar for sf (Clute) mapped against four-stage ARG sequence
(Abba).

68	

Tom Abba

Participatory audiences

The successful author of an ARG requires abilities akin to ‘the social interaction
skills of throwing a  good party’ (Graham 171) because it is impossible completely to predict the behaviour of remote players, however narratively ‘pure’
their motivations for participating might be. Jane McGonigal argues that ARGs,
which require disparate teams of players to work together to solve narrativebased problems, represent a manifestation of Collective Intelligence (CI) behaviour. Within a CI culture, knowledge ‘ceases to be the object of established fact
and becomes a project’ (Levy 9), which is reflected in the ways in which teams
of ARG players do not simply respond to clues and puzzles in an anticipated
fashion, but work to discover new methods and strategies to solve problems.
In iLoveBees (2004), for example, such behaviour represented a  logarithmic
increase in what had been anticipated by the game’s designers. In addition to
collectively solving a series of puzzles of increasing difficulty, the player-collective comprising those most committed to the outcome of the narrative experience undertook the real time relay of a previously unknown five-word phrase to
phone networks across the world. In less than fifteen seconds from the phrase
being announced, the entire collective were aware of it and thus ready should
the in-game AI character call their number (see McGonigal).
	 The experience of Hazel Grian and Jon Williams’ ARG, MeiGeist (2007), also
demonstrates this phenomenon, one that is designed to work at the heart of
their later, also sf-themed, The Sky Remains (2008). MeiGeist, conceived initially as an ARG fitting into the ‘grassroots’ category of game, was developed
through discrete, publicly funded stages. Elements of the game development
were sponsored by The Watershed Media Centre in Bristol, Hewlett Packard
Labs and the UK Arts Council. The ‘rollout’ of the game itself was funded by the
Arts and Humanities Research Council and the University of the West of England.9 The primary narrative asked remote players to assist a central character,
Eva McGill, whose identity is called into question as she uncovers conspiracies
connected to seemingly ordinary details of her life, beginning with the disappearance of her pet cat. In a narrative combining elements as varied as probability theory, black light, the nature of the self and consciousness, quantum theory
and robotics, Eva found herself suspecting the motives of everyone she knew
(including the player community). The ARG began on 13 January 2007 and ran
over eight weeks. It included a live event in Bristol in February that attracted
9.  This financing through public arts funding is, as far I am aware, unique within the history of ARGs.

	

Hybrid stories	

69

the attention of the local media, increasing interest in the game during its last
month and broadening the player input base.
	 What the experience of running MeiGeist demonstrated, though, was that
far from relying on the comfort of a familiar narrative structure with easy solutions and convenient answers, participants in an interactive narrative experience actively sought out emergent storylines. For example, when it was noted
that Eva’s date of birth bore a slight resemblance to that of Irwin Schrödinger,
there was a frenzy of online activity seeking to link the Austrian physicist’s theories to the ongoing storyline. Echoing Hayden White’s observation that ‘narrative is a form of human comprehension that is productive of meaning by its
imposition of certain formal components on a virtual chaos of events, which
in themselves cannot be said to possess any particular form at all’ (Szulborski
61), such behaviour – what Henry Jenkins identifies as active audience activity
(104) – demonstrates the players’ desire to participate in the construction of the
fictional world.
	 Aspects of transmedia structures also have their reflections in the form story
takes. Nick Harkaway’s debut novel The Gone-Away World (2008) is arguably
constructed as a television series.10 The opening section, establishing the aftermath of the Gone-Away War, reads like scene-setting season premiere of a TV
series, complete with narrative hooks, snares and hints of what is to come. After
those first twenty-eight pages, the reader is taken back to the narrator’s childhood and, after nearly 300 pages of a digressive, meandering romp through the
pre-history of the post-apocalypse, the novel returns to where it started before
moving on to its conclusion. Harkaway structures his novel in a manner that
answers to the demands of a  twenty-first-century audience familiar with episodic screen narratives that require increasingly close attention,11 and he has
compared it to a DVD box-set release (personal email).
	 In Writing Machines (2002), N. Katherine Hayles calls for texts to be read
in light of their physical and cultural (and arguably teleological) apparatus.12
Such a  medium-specific approach to the conjunction of sf and interactivity
represented by the ARG format would seek to explore the specific manner in
which the online narrative is encoded and transmitted that distinguishes it
10.  See <http://vectoreditors.wordpress.com/2008/07/30/472/>, <http://vectoreditors.wordpress.com/​​
2008/​07/28/the-gone-away-world/> and <http://www.tomabba.com/otherthings/?p=512>.
11.  See Espen Aarseth’s argument for reframing such texts as ‘Ergodic’ – that is, requiring non-trivial
effort to read.
12.  This poses a challenge to the concept of remediation – the manner in which new media forms seek
‘to borrow avidly from each other as well as from their analog predecessors such as film, television and
photography’ (Bolter and Grusin 9) and, in doing so, seek to find new ways to address the audience –
that governed many early approaches to the transposition of content to new media.

70	

Tom Abba

from any analogue ancestor. In a landscape in which multiple storytelling forms
are becoming increasingly commonplace, addressing the ‘material’ qualities of
each aspect of the whole is rather more fruitful than limiting one’s analysis to
the nature of the reading or viewing experience alone. Two examples of this
are Tim Etchell’s novel, The Broken World (2008), and The Lost Experience. The
former mixes literary narrative and sf computer gameplay within a traditional
print novel. It is told in the form of an online walkthrough of the eponymous
game/world (told in a combination of second-, third- and, occasionally, firstperson) from which the narrator digresses (in first-person) as his own slacker
life begins to fall apart. As each entry is posted, resonances between the game
and ‘real life’ become increasingly apparent. If the novel is viewed as a transmedia text, the narration also exists as a ‘secondary’ narrative reliant on the
primary one of the game, producing much the same relationship as an ARG
derived from a commercial broadcast. The Lost Experience also demonstrates
a  mature manipulation of the materiality of its story elements. The publication of a  tie-in novel is familiar to most sf long-form narratives, but in this
instance the materiality of the book is complicated by its presence as an object
within the story universe. The novel Bad Twin (2006), credited to Gary Troup
(a  minor character who perished in the immediate aftermath of Flight 815’s
crash), comprises a mystery story set within the Lost universe. More than that,
however, it has featured in manuscript form within the television series itself,
having been found on the island by the increasingly avid reader, Sawyer (Josh
Holloway), and has provided readers/fans in ‘our’ universe with information
about the nature and history of the Hanso Foundation (the organisation apparently responsible for the facilities situated on the island). Ultimately, the novel
is a  transmediated meta-artefact within Lost’s evolving narrative. In Writing
Machines, Hayles draws particular attention to the materialist strategies at work
with Mark Danielewski’s House of Leaves (2000), observing that the multilayered and intratextual qualities of the novel ‘implicitly refutes the position
Claude Shannon assigns to humans in his famous communication diagram,
in which they are positioned outside the channel and labelled “sender” and
“receiver”’ (130). Danielewski’s tactic of requiring his novel to be decoded as
it is read enmeshes the reader ‘inside’ the text, both receiving and constituting
messages that, as Hayles suggests, percolate through the intersecting channels
of communication comprising House of Leaves. In a similar manner, our reading position with regard to Bad Twin implicates us in the reception of the novel.
Our complicity in the emerging story structure of Lost is compounded by Bad
Twin’s simultaneous status as object and subject.

	

Hybrid stories	

71

Destabilised textuality

William Gibson was not the first novelist to ‘predict’ the web, nor the first
to describe a  story form that might take place within its confines, but he
might  –  inasmuch as Neuromancer (1984) and its sequels depict a recognisable
near-future built on already-visible network technologies – have been the first
to appreciate and communicate the consequence of it. Gibson’s later works can
be seen as reassessments of his earlier vision. Pattern Recognition’s central conceit  – the search for the maker of fragments of footage surfacing across the
web  – echoes the structure of an ARG, but what is most interesting about the
novel are the ways in which it is not an ARG. An encrypted sequence of numerals watermarked inside each fragment of the footage is deciphered, but the solution of this puzzle does not prolong or sustain the story as it would in an ARG
by leading to the next in a series of puzzles. This suggests a medium-specific
structuring of story, since without puzzles, which have been prevalent in ARGs
since The Beast, ARG narratives would not exist. Unfortunately, ARG PuppetMasters (as creators and designers are known) have demonstrated a tendency
to seed puzzles in order to slow the narrative down. Players charging through
a story find themselves halted by encryptions, codes and logic games before the
next part of the narrative takes place. While this feature of the form provides
opportunities for CI behaviour, it is all too often employed as an end in itself
rather than the means of revealing something significant about the world of the
game.13 Were the puzzle elements to be removed or subverted, the composition
of ARG narratives (and arguably the constitution of the player/audience demographic) would be fundamentally altered.
	 I have thus far avoided any discussion of how the subgenres of sf might operate within a networked, transmediated, environment. Certainly cyberpunk has
benefited from the collapsing of boundaries between story platforms, as have
dystopian and alternative history narratives (the short distance between ‘our’
reality and the alternative one presented online lends itself to a  subtle shift,
rather than a giant leap, into the realms of fiction). In order to conclude, then,
the future of the form bears some examination.
	 The traditional distance between the remote, superior ‘author’ of a text and
his or her audience can be altered by that text’s presence as a mutable, interactive object. Its digital materiality serves, in the instance of interactive engage13.  Although not an ARG, the interactive fiction Inanimate Alice <http://www.inanimatealice.com>
ably demonstrates this. The puzzles breaking the flow of narrative apparently exist only in order to
interrupt the reading process.

72	

Tom Abba

I Am Legend. Warner Bros.

ment, to remind us that a story is being told, one within which we are invited
to participate. In concert with that engaged relationship, the steady merging of
genres is altering the nature of those narrative forms we recognise as ‘fantastic’. Clute argues that after the final act of story is done ‘we enter the region of
Recovery, where we must try to live’ (13). He is keen to emphasise that the role
of the fantastic in the twenty-first century is to make us realise our responsibilities toward the planet. He suggests that sf, operating as an optimistic genre,
increasingly points toward a future in which our contribution to the situation
in which we find ourselves can be retroactively justified, effectively explained
away through fiction. For example, although not included in Clute’s survey of
the field, I Am Legend (Lawrence US 2007) is arguably guilty of such a retrofitting by proposing an optimistic solution to humanity’s destruction of the world.
Despite his death in the final act of the film, Robert Neville (Will Smith) is identified in the closing voiceover narration as the source of an eventual cure for the
man-made disease that has all but eradicated humanity, affording him a position as ‘legend’ in the eyes of humanity (rather than the bleaker fate offered in
Richard Matheson’s novel upon which the film is based).
	 In contrast, Ken Eklund and Jane McGonigal’s World without Oil (2007), an
ARG released in the same year, features a near-future world reeling from a sudden and catastrophic oil shortage. Faced with this scenario as their ‘reality’, players were asked to describe how the crisis unfolded around them and to work
together on practical ways to adapt to the changed situation. The game sought
to apply CI to an impending problem, creating an ARG with some lasting value
for academics, policymakers and the public. The experience set out to provoke
measurable change in its participants, asking them to build community activ-

	

Hybrid stories	

73

ities around a common, collaboratively constructed game narrative.14 That two
pieces of sf released in the same year should address humanity’s ability both to
destroy and to redeem the world is, in itself, not especially worthy of attention.
What is striking, though, is the grammar by which each provides a solution to
the problem identified, and the means by which they do so. I Am Legend draws
on staple Hollywood narrative devices – the heroic individual struggling to survive in a hostile environment, pitting his intelligence against the problem in an
attempt to undo the damage done. World without Oil proposes a situation with
similar obstacles, but suggests the solution to the problem will come about by
harnessing our collective intelligence and enthusiasm. By the end of the game’s
thirty-two-week run, the solutions players had presented included forcing
government to change consumer attitudes, creating a network of independent,
fuel-efficient communities and, tellingly for a  game whose participants were
overwhelmingly located within the US, proposing this analogy for the postpeak oil situation:
We are all on this ship, a big ocean liner like the Titanic. And it’s sinking, slowly. So what
we’ve just seen is the water flooding the fourth class compartment. Some people scrambled
out of there into third class, where we are. Some didn’t make it. And some of the people
in first class are largely unaware of what’s going on, which is unfortunate, since they’re the
ones who actually own and operate this ship.15

Sf has long sought to illuminate the world in which we live. That desire for
illumination has accompanied the development of the form throughout its history, and continues to do so in our increasingly networked present. What the
emergence of multiplatform narrative might illustrate in addition, though, is
a methodology for considering the future role of the reader of sf.
	 As suggested above, postmodern culture has acted to destabilise the authority of the author of a  text, resulting in the responsibility for making meaning – for building worlds – being shared between author and audience. ARGs,
alongside other forms of multiplatform narrative, heighten the significance of
that collective role. Sf ’s horizon, too, is moving closer. William Gibson’s role in
the creation of the critical language by which we describe and use new media
technologies is suggestive of that proximity; and the way in which we ascribe
meaning to sf is increasingly concerned with observing our present, rather than
predicting our future. This, then, is a facet of the overall form sf takes in the
early twenty-first century. Reflective of a society burdened with the guilt of the
14.  Documentation and archive of the game can be found online, starting at <http://worldwithoutoil.
org/default.aspx?week=1>.
15.  See <http://worldwithoutoil.org/weekly.aspx?week=32>.

74	

Tom Abba

last century, and shackled since 2001 to a new century’s prevailingly dystopian
narrative, the relationship between cultural form and story content has driven
the creation of broken worlds, mediated through technological platforms built
on illusion.
	 The future of this hybrid form may not be so bleak, though. By inviting
a reader to participate in creating meaning, the authors of multiplatform story
forms are suggesting an alternative to the dystopian landscape disappointingly
recurrent on our screens since Ridley Scott’s Blade Runner (US/Hong Kong
1982). Additionally, Charles Olson’s description of narrative symbiosis omits to
ask what it is that shapes the content that he proposes dictates a story’s form.
That question foregrounds the debates informing the creation of story. The
questions sf continues to ask are part of that debate; the ongoing relationship
between the places story ends and the impacts of those endings are framed by
creation and textual meaning. The interactive reader continues to embrace their
responsibility, a shared part in the endeavour of building worlds, both fictional
and real.

Works cited
Aarseth, Espen, Cybertext: Perspectives on Ergodic Literature. Baltimore and London: The
Johns Hopkins UP, 1997.
Bolter, David Jay, and Richard Grusin. Remediation: Understanding New Media. Cambridge:
The MIT Press, 1996.
Caillois, Roger. Man, Play and Games. London: Thames and Hudson, 1962.
Clute, John. ‘Fantastika in the World Storm’. Foundation: The International Review of Science Fiction 102 (Spring 2008): 6–14.
Deuze, Mark. ‘Participation, Remediation, Bricolage: Considering Principal Components
of a Digital Culture’. The Information Society 22.2 (2006): 63–75.
Graham, Beryl. ‘Playing with Yourself: Pleasure and Interactive Art’. Fractal Dreams: New
Media in Social Context. Ed. Jon Dovey. London: Lawrence & Wishart, 2006. 154–79.
Grusin, Richard. ‘DVDs, Video Games and the Cinema of Interactions’. 2006. <http://www.
periodicos.ufsc.br/index.php/desterro/article/view/1457/1191>.
Hayles, N. Katherine. Writing Machines. Cambridge: The MIT Press, 2002.
Hill, Dan. ‘Why Lost Is Genuinely New Media’. 2006. <http://www.cityofsound.com/
blog/2006/03/why_lost_is_gen.html.>.
Jenkins, Henry. Convergence Culture: Where Old and New Media Collide. New York: New
York UP, 2006.
Levy, Pierre. Collective Intelligence: Mankind’s Emerging World in Cyberspace. Cambridge:
Perseus, 1997.
Lister, Martin, Jon Dovey, Seth Giddings, Iain Grant and Kieran Kelly. New Media: A Critical Introduction. London: Routledge, 2003.

	

Hybrid stories	

75

Manovich, Lev. The Language of New Media. Cambridge: The MIT Press, 2001.
McGonigal, Jane. ‘Why I Love Bees: A Case Study in Collective Intelligence Gaming’. 2007.
<http://www.avantgame.com/McGonigal_WhyILoveBees_Feb2007.pdf >.
Nicholls, Peter. ‘Conceptual Breakthrough’. The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction. Ed. John
Clute and Peter Nicholls. London: Orbit, 1993. 254–7.
Olson, Charles. ‘Projective Verse’. 1950. <http://www.angelfire.com/poetry/jarnot/olson.
html>.
Ornebring, Henrik. ‘Alternate Reality Gaming and Convergence Culture’. International
Journal of Cultural Studies 10.4 (2007): 445–62
Patterson, John. ‘You’ve Lost the Plot!’ The Guardian Guide 1 December 2007: 6.
Szulborski, Dave. This Is Not A Game: A Guide to Alternate Reality Gaming. Lulu Press, 2005.
Vint, Sherryl and Mark Bould. ‘There Is No Such Thing as Science Fiction’. Reading Science Fiction. Eds. James Gunn, Marleen S. Barr and Matthew Candelaria. Basingstoke:
Palgrave, 2008. 43–51.
Wolfe, Gary K. ‘Evaporating Genre: Strategies of Dissolution in the Postmodern Fantastic’.
Edging into the Future: Science Fiction and Contemporary Cultural Transformation. Eds.
Veronica Hollinger and Joan Gordon. Philadelphia: U of Pennsylvania P, 2002. 11–29.
——. ‘Malebolge, or the Ordinance of Genre’. Conjunctions 39: The New Wave Fabulists
(2002): 405–19.

About the contributors
Tom Abba is a Senior Lecturer at the University of the West of England. A new media practitioner and theorist, his work has also included narrative illustration, graphic design and
critical journalism, the latter addressing the convergence of psychogeography, genre fiction and new media forms. A Trustee of the Science Fiction Foundation, he is a member
of UWE’s Play Research Group and its Digital Cultures Research Centre. He maintains a
research blog at www.tomabba.com/otherthings.
M. Keith Booker is the James E. and Ellen Wadley Roper Professor of English and the
Director of the Program in Comparative Literature and Cultural Studies at the University
of Arkansas. He has published more than thirty books on literature, film, television and literary and cultural theory. His current research interests focus on sf, cultural studies, comic
books, graphic novels and the politics of children’s culture.
Catherine Chaput is an Assistant Professor at Brock University. Her research focuses on
the relationship between rhetoric and political economy as it manifests within particular
social, cultural and political texts. She is the author of Inside the Teaching Machine (2008)
and has published in journals such as College Composition and Communication, College
English, JAC: A Journal of Composition Theory and Radical Pedagogy.
John R. Cook is Reader in Media at Glasgow Caledonian University. His research on Peter
Watkins has been disseminated via journal articles, international symposia and voice-over
commentaries and special features for the DVD release of Watkins’ 1964 BBC TV film, Culloden. He is also the author of Dennis Potter: A Life on Screen (1995; revised 1998) and coeditor of The Passion of Dennis Potter: International Collected Essays (2000) and British
Science Fiction Television: A Hitchhiker’s Guide (2005).
Cynthia Erb is Associate Professor of Film and English at Wayne State University in Detroit.
A second, revised edition of her book, Tracking King Kong: A Hollywood Icon in World Culture is forthcoming.
Paul Grainge is Associate Professor of Film and Television Studies at the University of Nottingham. He is the author of Monochrome Memories: Nostalgia and Style in Retro America
(2002) and Brand Hollywood: Selling Entertainment in a Global Media Age (2008). He is also
co-author of Film Histories: An Introduction and Reader (2007) and editor of Memory and
Popular Film (2003).
Michael Grant was, until his retirement, Senior Lecturer in Film Studies at the University
of Kent. He has published on literature and cinema, especially the cinema of horror. His
books include T. S. Eliot: The Critical Heritage (1982), Dead Ringers (1997) and The Modern
Fantastic: The Films of David Cronenberg (2000).
Richard J. Hand, Professor of Theatre and Media Drama at the University of Glamorgan,
is the author of Terror on the Air: Horror Radio in America, 1931–52 (2006) and The Theatre of Joseph Conrad: Reconstructed Fictions (2005) and a founding co-editor of the Journal
Science Fiction Film and Television  2.1 (2009), 173–175

ISSN 1754-3770 (print)  1754-3789 (online)

©  LUP

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

