Testing a Storytelling Tool for Digital Humanities
Fabio Pittarello
Università Ca’ Foscari Venezia
Via Torino 155 - Venezia, Italia
pitt@unive.it

Abstract—This work presents an evaluation of ToBoA-3D, a
social web platform for the annotation of 3D models and the
creation of stories. ToBoA-3D was evaluated through a pilot study
realized in a real educational context, the 2014 edition of the Fall
School in Digital Humanities, held at the Università Ca’ Foscari
Venezia in collaboration with the École Polytechnique Fédérale
de Lausanne (EPFL). The tool was presented during the School’s
lectures and then used by the students for creating stories during
the labs’ activities. The results of the study were collected through
direct observation and a questionnaire. The answers evidenced
positive feedbacks for the core features of the platform and led
to define an initial set of guidelines for its educational use.

Keywords: annotation; cultural heritage; digital humanities;
education; pilot study; storytelling; web3d
I. I NTRODUCTION
The availability of 3D representations for scholars is a great
opportunity to support the processes of teaching and learning,
especially for those disciplines that are deeply involved in the
study of objects that have a 3D shape. A further exploitation of
3D objects can be obtained by their annotation that permits, for
example, to search annotated content across a set of different
3D worlds, overcoming the navigation mechanisms provided
by the authors of each model. ToBoA-3D [1] is a social
web platform that permits to exploit the educational potential
of annotated 3D worlds. It can be used for collaborative
annotation, navigation and search of 3D worlds; the users can
even add new 3D environments to the web repository and
share them with the other users. The latest evolution of the
platform [2] introduces the possibility to create educational
stories on the top of the annotated worlds and to share them
on the web. While ToBoA-3D can be personalized for different
knowledge domains, so far the development has been focused
on art and architecture. In this work we describe how ToBoA3D was tested in a real educational context, a necessary step
for evidencing its points of strength and weaknesses and designing more extensive educational experiences. The occasion
for the pilot study came from the Fall School in Digital
Humanities, held in Venice in October 2014, in the context of
the collaboration between the Università Ca’ Foscari Venezia
and the EPFL (École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne).
Digital Humanities are an area of research and teaching at
the intersection of computing and humanistic disciplines. This
area combines the methodologies of the traditional humanities
with tools and methods provided by computer science. The
faculty of the Venice Fall School was compliant with this
intersection, being composed by art and architecture historians
but also computer scientists, which transmitted to the students
DOI reference number: 10.18293/VLSS2015-011

complementary knowledge about the School’s educational
themes. The School was focused on the Venetian Renaissance
and included class lessons, visits to historical sites and labs.
About 20 students, mainly PhD students in Humanities, were
selected for participating to the School, programmed for a
full week. During this week a group of students had the
opportunity to learn how to use ToBoA-3D and to apply
this knowledge to the School’s themes. The results of the
experience were collected through direct observation and a
questionnaire and led to define a set of guidelines for the future
use of ToBoA-3D.
II. R ELATED WORKS
The related literature encompasses different fields, from
annotation of 3D worlds to storytelling. Because of space
limits we’ll give only some hints, addressing to [1] [2] for
further references. As far as annotation is concerned, there
are different proposals for adding high-level semantics to the
components of 3D environments, based on specifications such
as MPEG-7, Collada or X3D. Most proposals use annotations
referred to taxonomies or ontologies, but there are also systems
that permit to use free tags [1]. The latter ones offer a
more expressive and informal approach suited also to common
people. Their benefits for cultural heritage have already been
underlined in [3]. Annotation is however a first step towards
a more advanced use of 3D worlds. Scopigno et al. [4]
underline that the greater challenge for digital technologies
is the creation of tools that use 3D models for supporting
cultural heritage research. We claim that the introduction
of storytelling for annotated 3D worlds can bring further
advantages for researchers and pupils. Computer-enhanced
storytelling represents an evolution of traditional storytelling.
It takes advantage of technology for creating and delivering
stories, but also for designing and managing new narrative
models and proposing new relations between the narration,
the reader and the context. The analysis of narratology, the
science that studies the structure of the story, has greatly
helped the building of models and architectures for interactive storytelling [5]. Several studies have demonstrated the
usefulness of storytelling for educational experiences [6]. In
the cultural heritage domain storytelling is used for engaging
students during the learning process, associating the narration
to multimedia components [7], real scenes [8], augmented [9]
and virtual reality [10]. While other tools offer repositories
of assets for speeding the creation of stories, ToBoA-3D fully
exploits the potential of collaboration and knowledge sharing.

III. T HE T O B OA-3D P LATFORM
Each user can contribute to the ToBoA-3D platform in
different fashions, uploading 3D models, annotating the components that define the 3D environments or building narrations.
All the 3D environments belonging to the platform can be
explored both using a first-person navigation style or querying the system for retrieving interesting objects and places
contained inside of them. Altough users are not required to
perform all the types of activities, a typical session with
ToBoA-3D includes a mix of them. As far as the creation
of narrations is concerned, the author creates a story starting
from a list of personal bookmarks, corresponding to visited
3D viewpoints related to annotated objects and locations, and
selects an ordered set of them for defining the stages of
a linear story. Each stage is then associated to multimedia
content that will be automatically played during the narration.
Additional content, such as textual descriptions, images and
links to web resources, can be included. The interface for
listening to stories is displayed in Fig.1. The story is automatically played synchronizing the delivery of the information
associated to each stage with the automatic navigation to the
associated 3D locations. If the story is narrated across different
environments belonging to the platform, the system takes care
of downloading automatically the required environment. The
story can be stopped at any time, for allowing the listener
to focus on details, exploring the 3D view or accessing the
associated hypermedia. Stories can be navigated also selecting
the single stage from the list available on the lower panel
of the interface. Two key features of ToBoA-3D are that the
results of all the activities are shared and that their authors
are easily identifiable. The first feature enables all the users
to take advantage of the work done by the other members
of the community (e.g., upload of 3D models, annotations),
avoiding to start from scratch for authoring. The second feature
offers interesting scenarios for research and teaching. For
example ToBoA-3D permits students to annotate a set of 3D
architecture components after a lesson focused on classical
orders and then the teacher to check the annotations made by
each student, marked with the student’s ID. Further details
about the ToBoA-3D functionalities are available in [2].
IV. T O B OA-3D AT THE FALL S CHOOL
The goal of the Fall School was to investigate, through
a set of coordinated lectures and visits to Venetian palaces
and collections, new ways of visualizing the evolution of
architecture and artwork display. The School was focused in
particular on investigating the evolution of the Grimani Palace
in Venice and of the artwork collection contained in its main
room, the so-called Tribuna. During the preparatory work
we discussed with the other organizers how to present and
use the annotation platform during the School’s activities. A
skilled 3D modeler created a simplified model of the Grimani
Palace and its Tribuna that was used as the scenario for an
educational narration built with ToBoA-3D. The narration was
created with the contribution of Cristiano Guerneri, one of the
architecture historians involved in the School. It was organized

as a self-paced linear story, guiding the students with a virtual
camera through the locations of the palace. The first part of
the School included lectures held by art historians and focused
on the main School’s theme, but also talks related to the
use of new technologies for cultural heritage, among which
ToBoA-3D. The last two days of the school were dedicated
to technological labs, held in parallel for small groups of
students. For this reason, only four students out of twenty
had the chance to attend the ToBoA-3D lab. In spite of the
low number of students, the results were interesting. The
initial phase of the ToBoA-3D lab was dedicated to a tutorial
illustrating the different features of the platform. The students
were then invited to try the techniques acquired on some test
3D environments prepared for the School. Finally the students
listened to the introductory story by the art historian that ended
with the presentation of two tasks to accomplish:
•

•

the creation of a narration describing a tour through the
rooms of the palace, enriched with the snapshots taken
during the visit to the real building;
the creation of a a story related to an hypothesis of
reallocation of the artworks of the Tribuna Grimani,
which are currently placed in a different site.

The students interpreted both the themes proposed, altough
with some simplifications due to time constraints. The first
story was an humorous interpretation where one of the students
played the part of a Venetian nobleman and guided the listeners
through the rooms of the palace (see Fig.1 on the left). The
second story was a more serious narration, focused on the
hypothesis of reallocation of the artworks in the Tribuna
Grimani (see Fig.1 on the right; the red dots in the 3D scene
represent the original position of the artworks).
V. R ESULTS OF THE P ILOT S TUDY
The four students were PhD candidates representatives of
different research domains: visual arts and architecture (two
students), computer science and interaction design, literature.
While we should not consider this study as exhaustive, their
answers have a great value for identifying the points of
weakness and strength of the platform from different facets.
Only two of them (the computer scientist and one of the
art historians) had a fair knowledge of modeling techniques
and interactive 3D environments. None of them had previous experience related to the annotation of 3D worlds. The
results of the pilot study were collected through discussions
with students and a final questionnaire, composed of closed
and open questions, and articulated in 6 sections focused
on annotation, search, storytelling, sharing, workflow and
usability/engagement. We obtained positive results for most
of the features of ToBoA-3D. While we don’t have the space
to analyze the single results, we underline how the pilot
study led to define more precisely the profile of the students
interested in using this platform and the set of tasks that should
define a complete experience. These results will be useful
for designing a more advanced study or more extensive and
complete educational experiences based ToBoA-3D:

Fig. 1.

The two stories created by the students at the Digital Humanities Venice Fall School

design educational experiences for students interested in
visual representation; the study revealed that ToBoA-3D
resulted more appealing to students with a background
focused on visual representation rather than on literature;
we suggest, as a complementary guideline, that for longer
term experiences such as a master course, the introduction
of a basic 3D modeling course would be useful for giving
a basic knowledge of 3D representation and attracting
students with different cultural backgrounds;
• include search and information sharing among the activities of the educational experience; in the pilot study
students were shown the functionalities related to search
and information sharing and declared their interest for
them; however, starting also from the observations of
the students, we estimate that it would be interesting to
include specific tasks focused on these activities in the
structure of the educational experience, proposing for example to search an annotated set of 3D worlds in relation
to a given goal or to ask a group students to annotate
individually the same set of objects and then check the
annotations of their fellows for identifying different point
of view; probably these activities would augment the
awareness of the potential of these techniques and would
stimulate their application to individual research;
• include knowledge checking as part of the educational
experience; while the educational experience proposed
in this experience included a set of goals defined by a
teacher, for time constraints it was not possible to fulfill
all the teacher’s requests and to check the results; a full
educational experience should include a final check by the
teacher of the individual work and a feedback to students.
Other suggestions came from the feedback related to the
ToBoA-3D functionalities. While we obtained positive judgments for the core features of ToBoA-3D, most of the students
complained about the quality of the 3D models, realized under
heavy time constraints. This is an issue that we’ll take into
account for the future educational experiences. The students
suggested improvements to the platform as well. While the
students with an humanistic background focused more on
content and structure, suggesting for example the possibility to
•

create stories with branching structures, the computer science
student focused on interaction design issues, suggesting ways
to refine the interface or adding additional functionalities.
While the positive findings encourage us to propose the
use of the platform in real educational contexts, the future
development will take care of all the points of weaknesses
underlined by the users and improve further its features.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Thanks to Ivano Gatto for all the contributions given to
the development of the ToBoA-3D platform. I acknowledge
Frédéric Kaplan and Isabella Di Lenardo (EPFL), which coorganized the Fall School in Digital Humanites, and Cristiano
Guarneri (Università IUAV), which gave a great contribution
for the educational story for the students.
R EFERENCES
[1] F. Pittarello and I. Gatto, “ToBoA-3D: an architecture for managing topdown and bottom-up annotated 3d objects and spaces on the web,” in
Proc. of Web3D ’11, 2011, pp. 57–65.
[2] I. Gatto and F. Pittarello, “Creating web3d educational stories from
crowdsourced annotations,” Journal of Visual Languages & Computing,
vol. 25, no. 6, pp. 808–817, 2014.
[3] J. Trant, “Exploring the potential for social tagging and folksonomy
in art museums: Proof of concept,” New Review of Hypermedia and
Multimedia, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 83–105, 2006.
[4] R. Scopigno, M. Callieri, P. Cignoni, M. Corsini, M. Dellepiane,
F. Ponchio, and G. Ranzuglia, “3D Models for Cultural Heritage: Beyond
Plain Visualization,” Computer, vol. 44, no. 7, pp. 48–55, Jul. 2011.
[5] M. Cavazza and D. Pizzi, “Narratology for interactive storytelling:
A critical introduction,” in Proc. of TIDSE’06. Berlin, Heidelberg:
Springer-Verlag, 2006, pp. 72–83.
[6] J. Ohler, Digital Storytelling in the Classroom: New Media Pathways to
Literacy, Learning, and Creativity. Corwin Press, 2008.
[7] K. Kwiatek and M. Woolner, “Let me understand the poetry: Embedding
interactive storytelling within panoramic virtual environments,” in Proc.
of EVA ’10, 2010, pp. 199–205.
[8] J. Halloran, E. Hornecker, G. Fitzpatrick, M. Weal, D. Millard,
D. Michaelides, D. Cruickshank, and D. De Roure, “The literacy
fieldtrip: using ubicomp to support children’s creative writing,” in Proc.
of IDC ’06, 2006, pp. 17–24.
[9] Z. Zhou, A. D. Cheok, J. Pan, and Y. Li, “An interactive 3d exploration
narrative interface for storytelling,” in Proc. of IDC ’04. New York,
NY, USA: ACM, 2004, pp. 155–156.
[10] S. Mystakidis, N. Lambropoulos, H. M. Fardoun, and D. M. Alghazzawi,
“Playful blended digital storytelling in 3d immersive elearning environments: A cost effective early literacy motivation method,” in Proc. of
IDEE ’14. New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2014, pp. 97–101.

