Journal of the Philosophy of History 5 (2011) 131—145
BRILL
brill.nl/jph
Review Article
Hayden White: The Making of a Philosopher of History
Hayden White, The Fiction of Narrative: Essays on History, Literature, and Theory, 1957—2007, ed. Robert Doran (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2010), 382 pp., ISBN 978-0-8018-9479-4.
What does it take to become an influential, widely-cited and much-discussed thinker? In a fascinating analysis of how Jacques Derrida acquired his academic star reputation (“How to Become a Dominant French Philosopher”), sociologist Michele Lamont has shown that this reputation was only in part a result of Derrida’s own ideas, his provocative interventions, his distinctive writing-style, or his keen nose for what was new and exciting in the world of letters. What was more important, argues Lamont, was that Derrida’s philosophy “fitted in with the intellectual culture of specific fractions of the French upper-middle-class,” that “its politics appealed to French intellectuals at the end of the 1960s,” and that “it appealed to the professional interests of philosophers by promoting a new image of their field during an institutional legitimacy crisis.”1 In other words, it was not primarily Derrida’s work as such, but rather its fit with the needs and expectations of its audiences that gained the author the reputation of an important, avant-garde philosopher.
In the case of Hayden White, the American historian and literary theorist whose Metahistory: The Historical Imagination in Nineteenth-Century Europe (1973) has become known as a flagship of “narrativist” philosophy of history, such processes of interaction with audiences in various fields of the humanities have arguably been as crucial in securing the author’s reputation as in the case of Derrida. This is evidenced, first of all, by the fact that White has basically two reputations. As Richard T. Vann and Peter Novick have demonstrated, professional historians often associate White’s name with postmodern attempts to undermine the foundations of their discipline. Some American historians even seem to regard White as a “symbolic embodiment” of “nihilistic relativism.”2 By contrast, literary scholars
1)	Michele Lamont, “How to Become a Dominant French Philosopher: The Case ofJacques Derrida”, The American Journal of Sociology, 93 (1987), 584—622, here 589.
2)	Peter Novick, That Noble Dream: The “Objectivity Question” and the American Historical
© Koninklijke Brill NV, Leiden, 2011
DOI: 10.1163/187226311X555491
132 Review Article /Journal ofthe Philosophy of History 5 (2011) 131—145
by and large welcome White's study of the discursive and rhetorical dimensions of historical texts. They treat him, not as a “relativist” or “postmodernist,” but as an ally in their quest to rethink human culture from a textual point of view. Different disciplines, indeed, have different Whites.3
More importantly, audience responses have significantly contributed to White's reputation in so far as his work after the mid-1970s was to a considerable extent shaped by how especially literary scholars responded to Metahistory and some of its follow-up essays. Under their influence, White increasingly began to publish in literary theory, submitting his essays to Critical Inquiry rather than to the Journal ofthe History of Ideas. Also, encouraged by their criticism, White started to develop the discursive and rhetorical readings of historical texts that are now routinely associated with his name.4 Moreover, not a small number of the articles and book chapters that contributed to his fame as a narrativist philosopher of history were solicited by journal editors and conference organizers in the field of literary theory. This raises the question: Had White always been interested in matters of narrative, discourse, and rhetoric? Or did this interest only emerge in the 1970s, at least in part in response to the reception that Metahistory received?
I
The latter is strongly suggested by the volume under review in this essay. The Fiction of Narrative: Essays on History, Literature, and Theory, 1957—2007 is a lengthy collection of essays written by White over the course of half a century and carefully brought together by Robert Doran, a scholar of French and comparative literature teaching at the University of Rochester. Although White himself has published three collections of essays — with another one currently in the making — Tropics of Discourse (1978), The Content ofthe Form (1987), and Figural Realism (1999) capture only a small portion of his prolific scholarly output. Currently, White's bibliography counts about two hundred articles, book chapters, commentaries, forewords, afterwords, and often lengthy book reviews (interviews and letters to the editor not included).5 Many of these, especially the older ones, appeared in relatively unknown periodicals and are only familiar to specialists. Robert
Profession (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988), 599; Richard T. Vann, “The Reception of Hayden White”, History and Theory, 37 (1998), 143—161.
3)	See the introduction to my forthcoming book, Hayden White: The Historical Imagination (Cambridge; Oxford: Polity Press, 2011).
4)	White first conducted this type of analysis in “Historicism, History, and the Figurative Imagination”, History and Theory, Beiheft 14 (1975), 48—67.
5)	See the bibliography included in my Hayden White (see above, n. 3).
Review Article/Journal of the Philosophy of History 5 (2011) 131—145
133
Doran is to be applauded, then, first of all for making a generous selection of no less than twenty-three previously uncollected essays available to a larger audience, and secondly for including in his collection almost two handfuls of pieces written before 1973. Throwing light on White's pre-Metahistory career, these older pieces strongly suggest that White's narrativism did not exist long before Metahistory.
Take, for example, “Religion, Culture, and Western Civilization in Christopher Dawson's Idea of History” (1957), an article White wrote at the invitation of Mario Praz, the Italian art collector and scholar of English literature whom he had come to know during his research stay in Rome (1953—1955). Now almost forgotten,6 this passionately written article reveals some of White's main concerns in the years following his doctorate at the University of Michigan. Intrigued by what he called “the multiplicity of human creativity” (46),7 White inquired how Christopher Dawson, the Catholic British historian, responded allergically to all sorts of social and economic reductionism in the explanation of past human behavior, but succumbed to yet another reductionism in overemphasizing the role of Christian religion in the development of Western society. The article shows in fascinating detail how the young Hayden responded with astonishment and anger to worldviews such as Dawson's, which (deliberately) refused to acknowledge what increasingly came to serve as an Archimedean point in White's own thinking, namely, the irreducible freedom and responsibility of human beings to define their own moral standards and to shape their own lives. An early articulation of White's much-discussed “humanism,”8 the essay ends on a programmatic note, with a declaration of principles that helps explain what Novick calls White's “existentialist quasi obsession with the historian's liberty of choice”:9
Modern man must, whether he will or not, assume responsibilities for his own actions rather than have them exorcised by a priesthood claiming contact with the one, true God. If earlier societies seemed better adjusted or more harmonious then our own, it
6)	See, however, Dermot Quinn, “Christopher Dawson and the Catholic Idea of History”, in Stratford Caldecott and John Morrill (eds.), Eternity in Time: Christopher Dawson and the Catholic Idea of History (Edinburgh: T&T Clark, 1997), 69—92, there 85—87.
7)	Page numbers in parentheses refer to the volume under review.
8)	See, e.g., Hans Kellner, “A Bedrock of Order: Hayden White's Linguistic Humanism”, History and Theory, Beiheft 19 (1980), 1—29; David Harlan, The Degradation of American History (Chicago; London: University of Chicago Press, 1997), 105—126; Torbjorn Gus-tafsson Chorell, “Humanism, relativism och tolerans: Hayden Whites samtal med Roger Chartier”, Historisk Tidskrift, 124 (2004), 373—390; Herman Paul, “Hayden White and the Crisis of Historicism”, in Frank Ankersmit, Ewa Domanska, and Hans Kellner (eds.), ReFiguring Hayden White (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2009), 54—73.
9)	Novick, That Noble Dream, 601.
134 Review Article /Journal of the Philosophy of History 5 (2011) 131—145
is because State and Church acted together to destroy individual responsibility rather than encourage it. For good or for evil, modern science has broken through these older compulsives and offered to man responsibility for everything he does. It is a terrifying gift but one eminently worthy of its recipient (49).
Likewise, “The Abiding Relevance of Croce's Idea of History,” written in Italy in 1961, shows how deeply White had immersed himself in Benedetto Croce's philosophy of history — encouraged, no doubt, by Carlo Antoni, one of White's intellectual mentors at Rome, whose Croce-inspired study Dallo storicismo alla sociologia (1940) he translated into English (1959). For White, Croce came close to embodying the liberal humanism advocated in his essay on Dawson. “In an age of simpli-cist creeds, Croce continued to remind Europe that human nature was a problem rather than a datum” (51). In other words, what human nature is cannot be settled once and for all; human beings continually reinvent themselves and creatively adapt themselves to new situations. Quoting Jose Ortega y Gasset, White concluded that for Croce, human beings have a history rather than a nature. Historians, then, should not only write the history of humankind as a history of creative choices, but also realize that their work has to inspire such choices, that is, to serve as a form of “preparation for morally responsible action” in the future (64).10
How important White considered the moral function of historical writing can also be seen from his conference paper, “What Is a Historical System?” (written in 1967, though published only five years later). The essay reads like a follow-up to White's famous criticism of academic historiography in “The Burden of History” (1966), especially because it consistently asks what the benefit of history is for human beings in troubled times. Not surprisingly, perhaps, the answer varies on what Friedrich Nietzsche called a “monumental” mode of history writing: the past offers inspiration to present generations in so far as these conceive of themselves as heirs of an (idealized) past. Just as Renaissance humanists saw themselves as spiritual sons of what was good and true in ancient Greece and Rome, so present generations may choose a set of ideal ancestors as models of what they consider a worthwhile human life. As always, the existentialist-inspired humanist that White was (and is) thought of such processes in thoroughly voluntaristic terms: “In choosing our past, we choose a present; and vice versa. We use the one to justify the other” (135).
10) “Nothing in English had better shown why history for Croce transcends naturalism to become the story of liberty, or why Croce's historicism entails broadly liberal implications,” a respected Croce scholar once remarked about this article. See David D. Roberts, Historicism and Fascism in Modern Italy (Toronto; Buffalo; London: University of Toronto Press, 2007), 243.
Review Article/Journal of the Philosophy of History 5 (2011) 131—145
135
Although “The Tasks of Intellectual History” (1969), included in this collection as Chapter 5, represents a rather different phase in White's intellectual Werdegang, it addresses none of the themes — narrative, discourse, and rhetoric — that came to characterize White's work in the 1970s. By the late 1960s, White rather sought a solution to the problem that a Crocean-type of humanism increasingly seemed too tame, “too groping, too other-initiated, too little disposed to positive actions and firm convictions,” to countervail the anti-humanist forces of mass society, technological revolution, and Cold War politics.11 Besides, his deep-seated individualism notwithstanding, White wondered whether the phenomena that caused him great worry in the 1960s — rapid urbanization, industrialization, and the rise of various totalitarianisms, especially in the so-called Third World — could be explained in terms of individual human decisions alone. The work of Lucien Goldmann, then, presented itself as an alternative. Although Norman Cantor exaggerates in calling White “an important disciple of Goldmann in the United States,”12 the 1969 essay illustrates that, for a while at least, White heavily sympathized with the Romanian-French Marxist philosopher. Goldmann's quest for the social determinants of mentalities, wrote White, “offers the best suggestions for dealing with those cataclysmic transformations — those revolutions in sensibility — that the structuralism of Gombrich and Kuhn, on the one side, and of Foucault, Barthes and the Annales group, on the other, have avoided trying to analyze in any sociologically significant way” (96). This helps explain why, together with his colleague Robert Anchor, White endeavored to translate Goldmann's Sciences humaines etphilosophie (1952) into English (1969).
Only in “The Structure of Historical Narrative” (1971), White eventually touched upon the themes most familiar to current-day admirers and critics of his oeuvre. Drawing on Northrop Frye, among others, he distinguished between story, plot, and argument in historical representation, illustrating these “three levels of comprehension” (123) with examples taken from Tocqueville, Ranke, and Burckhardt — precisely as in Metahistory. In this article, indeed, the first contours of White's “formalist” approach to historical writing became visible. Significant, however, is that the most decisive influence behind this paper was not Frye's Anatomy of Criticism, but a series of articles by Louis O. Mink, the philosopher at Wesleyan with whom White would develop a close friendship after assuming the directorship of Wesleyan's Center for the Humanities in 1973. Especially Mink's “History and Fiction as Modes of Comprehension” (1970), with its distinctions
11)	Willson H. Coates and Hayden V. White, The Ordeal of Liberal Humanism: An Intellectual History of Western Europe, vol. 2 (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1970), 459.
12)	Norman F. Cantor, The American Century: Varieties of Culture in Modern Times (New York: HarperCollins, 1997), 304.
136
Review Article /Journal of the Philosophy of History 5 (2011) 131—145
between theoretical, categoreal, and configurational types of understanding, served as an impetus behind White's own threefold classification system.13 Strikingly, although one might expect White also to deal with “modes of ideological implication,” given the overarching interest in issues of morality, politics, and ideology that his work of the 1960s displays, this axis of analysis was added only in Metahistory.
So, as for the question when and how White became a narrativist, the essays collected in The Fiction of Narrative suggest at least two things. First, they amply show that White's work prior to the 1970s revolved around rather different issues than those most frequently associated with his name. White was — and, I would add, has to a large degree remained — primarily interested in how human beings may use the past to live a morally responsible life vis-a-vis the challenges they face in their environments. Secondly, these essays demonstrate that White's interest in narrative emerged during the last stage of writing Metahistory. Although this implies that his “narrative turn” preceded the responses Metahistory evoked, it took years for White to relegate his concerns about the moral function of historical scholarship to the background of his work — where they remained of crucial importance nonetheless — and to focus more exclusively as well as more technically on mechanisms of tropological prefiguration and narrative amplification.
II
If, then, The Fiction of Narrative reveals a White not exactly resembling the theorist of tropes and plots nowadays frequently featured in textbooks, encyclopedias, and Wikipedia entries, one wonders how the editor has handled this discrepancy in his selection of articles. More generally, what have been the editor's criteria of inclusion? As far as I can tell — the editor only says how difficult his task of choosing was (341 n. 4), without explicating the criteria employed — Doran's aim has been to include White's most “substantial” essays (as distinguished from occasional pieces, responses, reviews, and the like). In pursuit of that aim, Doran has succeeded admirably. The Fiction of Narrative includes some of the best of White's uncollected work. In particular, I am pleased that it contains such important pieces as “The Discourse of History” (1979), “The Interpretation ofTexts” (1984), and “Writing in the Middle Voice” (1992), none of which is easily accessible
13)	Louis O. Mink, “History and Fiction as Modes of Comprehension”, New Literary History, 1 (1970), 541—558. “I'd like to have a copy of your piece in New Lit. Hist., but I have really been studying it quite carefully,” White wrote in a private letter to Mink (October 3, 1970), quoted in Richard T. Vann, “Louis O. Mink's Linguistic Turn”, History and Theory, 26 (1987), 1—14, there 6. Cf. Samuel James, “Louis Mink, ‘Postmodernism,' and the Vocation of Historiography”, Modern Intellectual History, 7 (2010), 151—184, there 156.
Review Article/Journal of the Philosophy of History 5 (2011) 131—145
137
through electronic databases such as JSTOR and EBSCOhost. However, as always, there is room for some debate.
For example, readers interested in how White's thought has developed over time may regret that Doran has not included White's 1966 article on Hegel's philosophy of history. Published in the journal Colloquium, this essay was said to be “taken from a chapter of Professor White's Modern Schools of Historical Thought, a volume in the New Dimensions Essays in Comparative History”114 As most readers will know, a book with this title never appeared. Only in 1973, a lengthy manuscript on nineteenth-century historical thought, on which White had labored for more than a decade, was accepted by Johns Hopkins University Press (after having been rejected by Cornell) and published as Metahistory.14 15 If this implies that the Hegel fragment published in 1966 was a first draft of the Hegel chapter that eventually appeared in Metahistory, a comparison between these two texts provides additional evidence for the claim that by the mid-1960s, White had not yet developed an interest in narrative. Additionally, this comparison reveals how greatly the author expanded his conceptual armamentarium in the years between 1966 and 1973. Although the first draft referred to a tragic dimension in Hegel's thought, only the second version employed the “tropological” language for which Metahistory has become renowned.16
Secondly, there may be readers interested in loose ends, abandoned paths, and underdeveloped areas in White's work. Although I argued in the previous section that The Fiction of Narrative has some surprises in store for those only familiar with White's post-Metahistory writings, readers who pick up this volume with the hope to learn more about, for instance, White's work in medieval church history — the field in which White specialized as a graduate student and published his first major research articles17 — will be disappointed. Might it not have been a good idea to include “Pontius of Cluny, the Curia Romana and the End of Gregorianism in Rome” (1958) or “The Gregorian Ideal and Saint Bernard of Clairvaux” (1960), if only to show that as an early career scholar, White respected all the scholarly conventions that his later work would call into question?18 Continuing this line of thought, I would also have opted for White's very first
14)	Hayden V. White, “Hegel: Historicism as Tragic Realism”, Colloquium, 5 no. 2 (1966), 10-19, there 10.
15)	Keith Jenkins, “A Conversation with Hayden White”, Literature and History, 7 no. 1 (1998), 68-82, there 74.
16)	I briefly elaborate on this comparison in the third chapter of my Hayden White (see above, n. 3).
17)	See Herman Paul, “A Weberian Medievalist: Hayden White in the 1950s”, Rethinking History, 12 (2008), 75-102.
18)	Doran mentions these articles in a footnote (342 n. 9), but with errors in titles and page numbers.
138
Review Article /Journal of the Philosophy of History 5 (2011) 131—145
published article, “The Printing Industry from Renaissance to Reformation and from Guild to Capitalism” (1957). Tucked away in the Stechert-Hafner Book News, and absent from almost all Hayden White bibliographies, this article is rather atypical, in comparison to White's later work. Not only does it practice a form of socio-economic history, but, in almost Marxist fashion, it comes close to reducing the “superstructure” of sixteenth-century intellectual life to a “base” of printing industries that enabled the spread of Renaissance and Reformation thought in Europe. Interestingly, in emphasizing the importance of these printing presses, White's youthful essay anticipated some of the ground-breaking ideas that Elizabeth Eisenstein would develop in her classic study, The Printing Press as an Agent of Change (1979).19
Thirdly, it is far from accidental that throughout his career, White has produced a great number of forewords, commentaries, responses, and book reviews. Characteristic of his modus operandi as a historical theorist was (and still is) his talent for entering a pre-existing discourse — on “otherness,” the uniqueness of the Holocaust, or even musical representation, to give a few random examples — and to challenge some of its prevailing assumptions, often by showing that there are alternative, perhaps more desirable options available.20 Indeed, one reason why White's oeuvre addresses such a wide range of topics is that the author takes a particular delight in provocative second-order reflection. If one wants to see White's conceptual apparatus at work, look at how he analyzed the “unity” discourse of the European Union or the “garbage effect” of late-modern capitalism.21 If one wishes to encounter the dialectician, the rhetorician, and the provocateur in White, examine how he anatomized the latent theology in Rene Girard's philosophy of violence or tore to shreds the scientism underlying Leon Pompa's study ofVico.22 This implies, however, that what seem to be White's most substantial essays — those seemingly freestanding articles that are not explicitly situated in a dialogue with others — provide only a partial view of White's work. And if this is the case, one may wonder
19)	Elizabeth L. Eisenstein, The Printing Press as an Agent of Change: Communications and Cultural Transformations in Early-Modern Europe (Cambridge; New York: Cambridge University Press, 1979). I owe this suggestion to Djoeke van Netten.
20)	Allan Megill, “The Rhetorical Dialectic of Hayden White,” in Ankersmit, Domanska, and Kellner (eds.), Re-Figuring Hayden White, 190—215, there 191—194.
21)	Hayden White, “The Discourse of Europe and the Search for an European Identity”, in Bo Strath (ed.), Europe and the Other and Europe as the Other (Brussels: Peter Lang, 2000), 67—86; Frederick Aldama, “Hayden White Talks Trash”, Bad Subjects, 55 (2001), 12—17.
22)	Hayden White, “Ethnological ‘Lie' and Mythical ‘Truth'”, Diacritics, 8 no. 1 (1978), 2—9; review of Vico: A Study of the “New Science” by Leon Pompa, History and Theory, 15 (1976), 186-202.
Review Article/Journal of the Philosophy of History 5 (2011) 131—145
139
why The Fiction of Narrative contains a mere one review essay (Chapter 23, on Paul Ricoeur).
Another reason to lament the relative absence of such genres as the commentary and the book review is that some of White's most “occasional” pieces — but are there really any non-occasional articles? — happen to throw important light on what motivated the author in his better-known work. For example, there has been a prolonged debate, muddied by confusion and misunderstanding, over the extent to which White's advocacy of the “sublime,” especially in “The Politics of Historical Interpretation” (1982), justified the historical identity politics of Palestinians in the West Bank or Muslim Albanians in Kosovo. At a 1990 UCLA conference devoted to issues of Holocaust representation, Carlo Ginzburg even went so far as to accuse White of a lack of critical distance from totalitarian abuses of history.23 How interesting, then, to notice that only a couple of years earlier, at the campus of New York University, the accused had leveled exactly the same complaint against Mario Perniola, a philosopher who sang the praises of differance and fluidity in Italian philosophical culture. Referring to Italy's totalitarian past as well as to various totalitarian threats in his own days, White had argued that Perniola's postmodernism was “a weak base on which to erect a defense against technological nihilism or the various totalitarianisms with which we are confronted today.”24
If this suggests that White was not insensitive to Ginzburg's concerns, another seemingly “unimportant” piece, written in 1970, reveals why the author nonetheless did not hesitate to affirm the sublime, including its potentially dangerous political implications. In rather activist prose, this eulogy on George A. Kelly's Idealism, Politics and History called for a utopian politics, willing and prepared to make dirty hands for the sake of noble ideals:
“Promethean politics” may be dangerous, and doubly dangerous in an age of atomic weaponry, but it may be the only alternative to the “logistical politics” which that weaponry generates. It is certainly preferable to the “Sisyphean” alternative which, in the face of technological means to alleviate human suffering, contents itself with piecemeal planning and sets a Scandinavian sharing of the wealth as the outer limits of its oneiric aspirations.25
23)	Carlo Ginzburg, “Just One Witness”, in Saul Friedlander (ed.), Probing the Limits of Representation: Nazism and the “Final Solution” (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1992), 82-96.
24)	Hayden White, “The Italian Difference and the Politics of Culture”, Graduate Faculty Philosophy Journal, 10 no. 1 (1984), 117-122, there 118.
25)	Hayden White, review of Idealism, Politics and History by George Armstrong Kelly, History and Theory 9 (1970), 343-363, there 362.
140
Review Article /Journal of the Philosophy of History 5 (2011) 131—145
So, if Doran presents The Fiction of Narrative as “a sort of intellectual autobiography” (xiii), some reservation is in order. Sure, through its selection of essays, the volume construes a view of White's intellectual development. However, this view is more biased towards “great texts” than towards the less visible, but sometimes more dazzling, more polemical, more outspoken political texts that constitute perhaps the largest part of White's scholarly output.26
III
Readers would do well to bring a similar dose of skepticism to the autobiographical comments White himself provides in a preface written for this collection. Admittedly, this little piece is an elegant, unmistakably Whitean text, cheerfully ironic about his “youthful idealism, both philosophical and political, of which time and experience have long since cured me” (ix), but considerably less favorably disposed towards the idealisms of “those who are doing history in a professionally accredited way” (x). Yet, one may wonder what to make of White's autobiographical retrospections. Just as the naive “bread-and-butter” historian (321) has long since become a topos, or a rather cliche-ridden character, in White's philosophy of history, one cannot help thinking that, unavoidably perhaps, White's version of his life-story is structured by topoi that students of his work should not uncritically accept.27
For example, like in many of the interviews he granted in the 1990s and 2000s, White seizes the opportunity to explain how much he has been inspired and influenced by William J. Bossenbrook, his legendary undergraduate teacher at Wayne University (ix). Without denying the significance of Bossenbrook's personal example, especially as a teacher and pedagogue, I think that this incessant reference to Bossenbrook says at least as much about White in the decades around 2000 — in particular about his “ideal of what a great teacher should be and do”28 — as it does
26)	Speaking about other genres than the scholarly journal article or book chapter: there has been a time in which White used to write letters to the editor of The New York Times and other periodicals, demanding the immediate release of political prisoners such as Angela Davis and Vladimir Bukovsky. See, e.g., “On Vietnam”, The New York Times (June 5, 1966), 208; “Vladimir Bukovsky”, The New York Review of Books (April 7, 1972), 46. As I argues in my Hayden White (see above, n. 3), this political activism ought not to be dismissed as a sideline activity to White's philosophy of history.
27)	For insightful observations on the autobiographical genre as practiced by historians, see Jeremy D. Popkin, History, Historians, and Autobiography (Chicago; London: University of Chicago Press, 2005).
28)	Ewa Domanska, “Hayden White, an Academic Teacher”, in Ankersmit, Domanska, and Kellner (eds.), Re-Figuring Hayden White, 332—347, there 345.
Review Article/Journal of the Philosophy of History 5 (2011) 131—145
141
about that gifted story-teller back in 1940s Detroit. Moreover, given the absence of any evidence suggesting that Bossenbrook was more than a contagious example of how imagination and scholarly erudition could be brought into the classroom, I am inclined to respond skeptically to such grandiose claims as that “Bossenbrook created Hayden White.”29
29)	Domanska, “Hayden White”, 335. In the past ten years or so, I have given a fair number of lectures on White’s philosophy of history. On such occasions, I was often surprised by the number of questions I received on Bossenbrook’s supposedly “magic” influence on the young White. Because such myths are usually not created ex nihilo, I decided to do some serious research. I spent a couple of days in the special collections of the University of Chicago Library, consulting Bossenbrook’s MA thesis (“The Interpretation of the Italian Renaissance”) and PhD dissertation (“Justus Moeser as an Historian”), both of which were written under supervision of James Westfall Thompson (the author of a remarkably erudite survey on the history of historiography, published posthumously in 1942). I went through Thompson’s correspondence with his promising student and read every piece of Bossen-brook on which I could lay my hands. Yet, to my regret, I have never been able to do anything with these materials, mainly because they do not justify the inference that White’s philosophy of history was in any significant sense indebted to Bossenbrook’s work. Of course, there is no lack of sources testifying to Bossenbrook’s legendary status as a teacher. “When Professor Bossenbrook talked about the trade routes to the East,” writes Goldwin Smith, “you could almost see the sails of the great spice ships and hear the camels grunt by the walls of Trebizond. You saw, or almost saw, the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel being painted and felt the agony and genius of the creator” (“The Gates of Excellence”, in Gold-win Smith (ed.), The Professor and the Public: The Role of the Scholar in the Modern World (Detroit: Wayne State University Press, 1972), 13-42, there 27). Neither is there any reason to doubt that White, not unlike some of his classmates, modeled himself after Bossen-brook’s charismatic example when he commenced a teaching career of his own in the mid-1950s. The point, however, is that any claim going beyond this — extending Bossen-brook’s significance to that of a formative influence on White’s philosophy of history - has nothing to rely upon, except White’s personal stories from the 1990s and 2000s. Unintentionally, this is also demonstrated by Allan Megill’s search for similarities between White and Bossenbrook, which has yielded only rather unspecific results, such as that both men were committed to liberal-arts education, interested in questions of historical interpretation, and authors of broad-ranging textbooks which made frequent use of essentializing typologies (“Rhetorical Dialectic”, 198, 205, 206, 207). Even if one adds that Bossen-brook, like White, ascribed to historians a responsibility for addressing current-day problems, and regarded “fascism,” “technological culture,” and “mass society” as the most urgent of these problems (see, e.g., William J. Bossenbrook, “Introduction,” in MidTwentieth Century Nationalism, ed. William J. Bossenbrook (Detroit: Wayne State University Press, 1965), 5-12, there 6, 9, 11), these similarities are too general to distinguish Bossenbrook and White from other mid-twentieth-century intellectual historians in the United States. Moreover, they contribute little to explaining the distinctive features of
142
Review Article /Journal ofthe Philosophy of History 5 (2011) 131—145
Interesting, however, is White's insistence on the Kantian dimension to his work, that is, his profound conviction that history ought “to contribute to the question that Kant defined as the soul of ethics: What should I (we) do?” (xi).30 Starting from this question, White briefly explains what he has discussed at length throughout his oeuvre: that history originally was a branch of rhetoric; that most works of history were written, not so much as a search for truth, but rather as “a search for what the truth means for living people” (xi); that nineteenth-century advocates of “scientific” history actively repressed the rhetorical and imaginative dimensions of historical interpretation in order to focus on truth instead of meaning; that the “historical realism” which resulted from this suppression cannot claim epistemological privilege; and that novels, especially of the modernist type that White admires, may contribute significantly more to the Kantian project than peer-reviewed articles in academic history journals. Indeed, once the pattern is recognized, some of the seemingly disparate parts of White's oeuvre come together like pieces of a jigsaw puzzle. If White's philosophy of history, as developed over the course of more than half a century, has a single center of gravity, it is the practical question — practical in the sense of Kant'spraktische Vernunft — how one should live a morally responsible life.
This brings us to Robert Doran's fine editorial introduction. In a rich overview of White's work throughout the past half-century, Doran explains such key elements as the tropes, the relation between events and facts, narrative emplotment, and the threat of relativism that is often said to shadow White's voluntarism. He shows important lines of continuity between what others perceive as distinct phases in White's development (345 n. 39) and correctly criticizes some stereotypical ideas about White's project. Especially its careful attempts to specify what White wanted to achieve with his tropes, plots, figures, and fulfillments make this text a very useful introduction to White's philosophy of history. Scholars who continue to depict White as either a postmodern relativist or an avant-garde literary critic — the twofold reputation with which this essay started — may learn from Doran that White was neither of these (xvi). Historians worried about White's lack of interest in source criticism and other traditional methodological issues may reflect on Doran's observation that White replaced the idea of history as art (techne) by a more poetic (poiesis) notion of history (xxiv). Also, graduate students wres
White's subsequent philosophy of history, including especially his Italian orientation (Croce), structuralist fascination (Levi-Strauss), Marxist leanings (Goldmann), and interest in literary theory (Frye).
30)	Hans Kellner has been the first to emphasize this Kantian element in White. See his “Hayden White and the Kantian Discourse: Freedom, Narrative, History”, in Chip Sills and George H. Jensen (eds.), The Philosophy of Discourse, vol. I (Portsmouth, NH: Boynton; Cook, 1992), 246-267.
Review Article/Journal of the Philosophy of History 5 (2011) 131—145	143
tling with Metahistory may benefit from Doran's remark that the book is not about historical interpretations, as conventional wisdom has it, but about the question what the concept of history can possibly involve (xix). Finally, anyone wondering what to make of White's “aestheticization” of ancient Christian Bible exegesis, especially in Figural Realism, finds a valuable aid in Doran's exposition of White's indebtedness to Erich Auerbach.
However, when the editor looks back upon this trajectory and concludes that, in the end, White's work is characterized by a “great synthesis” between Frye's formalism and Auerbach's historicism (xxxii) — a synthesis, moreover, which “is present virtually from the very beginning and runs throughout his entire career” (345 n. 39) — I think he overplays his hand. This is, first of all, because the prism chosen fractures a lot, but most notably not the moral and political dimensions to White's work. Admittedly, there was a deep humanist concern underlying Auerbach's Mimesis?1 Yet, neither Auerbach nor Frye fueled White's dreams of a Promethean politics or encouraged him to jump on the bonnet of a police car to protest against the Vietnam War.31 32 Equally important as Auerbach and Frye were Sartre, Camus, and Goldmann, not to mention that rather peculiar mix of Amer-ican-style existentialism and British socialism that White encountered as an undergraduate student through such magazines as the New Statesman and Nation.33
Secondly, Doran's “Frye + Auerbach = White” formula not only excludes such figures as Sartre and Camus, but also, on more than one occasion, overemphasizes the aesthetic motives behind White's appropriation of Frye and Auerbach, thereby downplaying that White's interest in, for example, figuralism was also fueled by a moral and political desire to break away from “bourgeois” modes of historical representation, the main problem of which was not an aesthetic one, but a tendency towards political conformism that did not suit White's own political agenda. For example, the expression “the content of the form” that came to serve as the title of White's second collection of essays did not refer to “the specifically aesthetic or literary dimension” of the historian's “narrative practice,” as Doran has it (xxiii), but rather to what White called the “distinct ideological and even specifically political implications” of narrative discourse.34
Likewise, it is only a half-truth to say that White's preference for “modernist or postmodernist techniques of representation, particularly when applied to recent
31)	As Robert Doran himself argues at length in “Erich Auerbach's Humanism and the Criticism of the Future”, Moderna, 11 (2009), 99—108.
32)	This anecdote is told by Claudio Veliz, “History as an Alibi”, Quadrant, 47 no. 3 (2003), 21—24, there 21.
33)	See the first chapter of my Hayden White (see above, n. 3).
34)	Hayden White, The Content of the Form: Narrative Discourse and Historical Representation (Baltimore; London: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1987), ix.
144
Review Article /Journal of the Philosophy of History 5 (2011) 131—145
history,” was “a matter of aesthetics” (xxvii). Undoubtedly, White would be the first to admit that aesthetic considerations play a role in determining what counts as history or what should be seen as an appropriate mode of historical representation. But he would add, as he has always done, that such a “choice” — White never dropped his voluntaristic language — is unavoidably also morally informed. Moreover, White believed such moral deliberation to be especially important in the case of so-called “modernist events,” that is, in cases when we are confronted with technically caused catastrophes in twentieth-century history that leave us speechless because we cannot possibly imagine what sort of meaning they can have. There are a lot of truths about Auschwitz, to be sure, but what is the meaning of those truths for us, involuntary heirs of that gruesome “modernity”? How can we live a responsible life in a world after Auschwitz? The most prominent reason why White came to regard modernist types of representation as most appropriate (or least worse) for modernist events is that they leave this question open. Modernist writing befits modernist events because it does not moralize, as narratives inevitably do, but leaves the moral judgment — the Kantian “what should I do” question — to the reader.35
IV
So, what The Fiction of Narrative simultaneously reveals and, to some extent, ignores is that White's reputation as a philosopher of historical narrative is onesided at best. As the foregoing illustrates, there is a deep moral impulse running through much of White's work — a humanist commitment to individual selfdetermination paired to a secularist rejection of religion and a Marxist-inspired desire for a type of politics that will eventually also enable the less fortunate on this earth to take command of their own lives. This moral agenda was definitely not the least important factor that helped shape White's philosophy of history. David Harlan exaggerates only slightly when he concludes: “White is a humanist, a moralist, and a deeply religious thinker. He conceives of history as a quest for ultimate reality and an act of personal transcendence. He is a theorist of redemption in a age of simulacra.”36
Against this background, it may be appropriate to end with a question: Does The Fiction of Narrative suggest that those Wikipedia authors and textbook writers
35)	See esp. Hayden White, “Truth and Circumstance: What (If Anything) Can Be Properly Said About the Holocaust?”, forthcoming in a volume of essays tentatively titled The Practical Past. I discuss this at much greater length in the final chapter of my Hayden White (see above, n. 3).
36)	Harlan, Degradation of American History, 123.
Review Article/Journal of the Philosophy of History 5 (2011) 131—145	145
who keep on reducing White to “quadruple tetrads” and “fictions of factual representation” must be criticized as unreliable guides to White's oeuvre? One reason not to immediately answer this question in the affirmative is Michele Lamont's observation that Derrida's reputation as a deconstructionist philosopher was as much the result of audience perceptions and expectations as of ideas and attitudes that Derrida himself expressed in such books as De la grammatologie. By analogy, the proper name, “Hayden White,” not only refers to an individual born in Martin, Tennessee, on July 12, 1928; it also names a reputation, or better, a variety of reputations that scholars across the humanities have come to attribute to the author of Metahistory. Indeed, for many humanities scholars, “Hayden White” is a metonymy for “narrative turn” or “metahistory.” What, then, except historical accuracy, would be the point of arguing that the “real” White is a different one, considering that White in his Wikipedia version has been more influential, and perhaps of greater importance, than the White emerging from the pages of the volume under review? Is not Doran correct, in the end, to portray White as a synthesis of Frye and Auerbach, given that, presumably, many readers would consider that a more interesting White than the morally driven and politically committed humanist evoked in the preceding pages?
Readers may decide for themselves, but it would be ironic, to the point of comical, to read White, the number one critic of moral agendas and ideological implications in historical discourse, as if his own work were devoid of such dimensions. Moreover, White's philosophy of history becomes richer, more finely textured, as well as more internally coherent once its underlying concerns about “a better world for our children and their progeny” are recognized.37 And whoever agrees with White that the sort of “circulating knowledge” that is the object of Lamont's sociological research ought to be challenged instead of reinforced might be eager to learn that the White who, in 1984, reflected on the “symbolicity inherent in the modernist conception of the sign-nature of language” (215) was the same as the one who, fifteen years earlier, surprised an audience in Toronto by openly embracing the “revolutionary implications” (148) of a “socially progressive historical vision” (144). Such readers, indeed, could do worse than buy themselves a copy of The Fiction of Narrative.
Herman Paul Leiden University h.j.paul@hum.leidenuniv.nl
37) Hayden White, “The Future of Utopia in History,” Historein, 7 (2007), 11—19, there 16.