8
“The Burden of History
Forty Years Later
David Harlan
Each man and each woman of you I lead upon a knoll,
My left hand hooking you round the waist,
My right hand pointing to landscapes of continents and the public road.
Not I, not any one else can travel that road for you,
You must travel it for yourself.
—Walt Whitman, “Song of Myself” (1855)
To whom or what are historians responsible? Edith Wyschogrod thinks our primary responsibilities are to the people who lived in the past, those for whom we presume to speak:
What is it that must precede the conveying of history? Must there not be the declaration of a double passion, an eros for the past and an ardor for the others in whose name there is a felt urgency to speak? To convey that-which-was in the light of this passion is to become a historian. Because the past is irrecoverable and the others in whose stead the historian speaks are dead, unknowable, she cannot hope that her passion will be reciprocated. To be a historian then is to accept the destiny of the spurned lover—to write, photograph, film, televise, archive, and stimulate the past not merely as its memory bank but as binding oneself by a promise to the dead to tell the truth about the past . . . without the necrophilia of the historian who gives herself to overcoming the past's passing into oblivion, there would be only the finality of death . . . the ethical referent goes all the way down.”1
170
DAVID HARLAN
A “double passion” then, and a double commitment: to the dead and to the truth (or the eros that drives one’s search for the truth).2 Allan Megill also thinks the ethical referent goes all the way down: “I take the promise of truth to be ethically primary. Fundamentally, before anything else, the historian needs to be able to vouch for the truth of the history that he or she writes, just as the accountant needs to be able to vouch for the truth of the accounts that he or she presents.”3
Arthur Danto has even argued that we don’t really have a choice in the matter:
It is, of course, not altogether plain that truth is to be preferred to illusion, or certain that it will make us free. It is only that we have no choice in the matter once we achieve historical consciousness, for we cannot will falsehood or inconsistency. Obviously we will live differently in the present as our beliefs about the past are modified . . . It may not be a better or more felicitous present, but it is not as though we have a choice. For when the past is in doubt, a question mark blurs the present . . . The present is clear just when the relevant past is known.4
Finally, and most important for our purposes, most historians, academic historians anyway, tend to believe that the best way to fulfill these commitments—this “double passion”—is by hewing to what Megill calls “the professional standards that constitute the historical endeavor.”5 Like Megill, Hans Kellner thinks that it is only in the practice of these standards that we define ourselves as historians:
Ethos has its etymological origins in the local, in the “haunts” of a people. It is, shall we say, “the way we do things here,” for any particular “we.” Ethics is rhetorical ethos, the general opinion of the community. Because we belong to many different communities simultaneously, ethical problems only arise when we are uncertain which identity takes precedence. So we need to ask who we are when we are being historical, as opposed to being something else.For historians
are without question primarily members of a guild with tacit rules and knowledge that determine almost everything. . . . Truth is what we have when we have located ourselves in this identity.6
In the pages that follow I will argue that Hayden White’s most important contribution—informing almost everything he has written, from “The Burden of History” in 1966 to “The Public Relevance of Historical Studies” in 2005—has been to point us in a very different direction, and that only now, at the beginning of the twenty-first century, are we coming to see both the importance and the urgency of that contribution. I
The Burden of History”	171
begin with a brief discussion of E. H. Carr’s little classic, What Is History? then move on to a slightly longer analysis of Michael Oakeshott’s several responses to Carr, particularly his famous essay—more of a manifesto, really—“The Emergence of the History of Thought.” All this in order to provide a context in which to think about what is White’s “Burden.” Published almost simultaneously with Oakeshott’s essay, it is best read as its classical counterpoint. For at the very moment that Oakeshott was urging historians to elevate their discipline to the status of an autonomous professional discipline, White was calling on us “to preside over the dissolution of history’s claim to autonomy among the disciplines.” I end by explaining why it is that now, at the beginning of the twenty-first century, it is not Michael Oakeshott but Hayden White who hooks us round the waist and points out the road we must travel.
Good Historians Have the Future in Their Bones.
Edward Hallett Carr published What Is History? in 1961.7 Alun Munslow wasn’t far off the mark when, forty years later, he declared, “for many today, What Is History? is the most influential book on historical thinking published in Britain this [the twentieth] century.”8 But it was an intensely controversial book at the time. Within a few months of its publication, Michael Oakeshott had launched a stinging attack, dismissing Carr’s argument as “inherently absurd” and Carr himself as “an old-fashioned thinker nibbling at the edge of stale ideas.”9 Six years later, in a then much-discussed but now nearly forgotten essay titled “The Emergence of the History of Thought” (1967), Oakeshott felt compelled to return to the issues Carr had raised. “Emergence” is a remarkable essay, not only for the clarity and obvious sympathy with which Oakeshott described and then rejected Carr’s position—without mentioning Carr by name—but also because it appeared almost simultaneously with White’s pivotal essay, “The Burden of History.”
Carr was an erudite man, a powerful polemicist and a confirmed historicist for whom “the beliefs which we hold and the standards of judgment which we set up are simply part of history.”10 What Is History? is his critique of the profession’s “almost mystical belief in the objectivity and supremacy of historical facts.”11 It is a brooding, haunted account that reads as if it had been written under all the weight and pressure of what
172
DAVID HARLAN
Whitman once called “the terrible doubt of appearances.”12 Carr claimed that history could never be a science because it could never find an evaluative standard that transcended its subject matter, could never come up with a truly autonomous criterion of judgment that stood outside of or beyond history itself—what Thomas Nagel famously called “the view from nowhere.”i3 “Historical facts” become historical facts only when some time-bound, date-stamped historian attaches her own particular significance to them by placing them in a narrative of her own, that is to say, only when she finds a way to describe the past which the past itself never knewd4
Rather than an objective science, Carr wanted us to think of history as a conversation between past and present—a continually evolving dialogue in which both the historian and her facts are constantly pressing up against one another, challenging and changing one another:
The historian starts with a provisional selection of facts and a provisional interpretation in the light of which that selection has been made—by others as well as by himself. As he works, both the interpretation and the selection and ordering of facts undergo subtle and perhaps partly unconscious changes through the reciprocal actions of one or the other. And this reciprocal action also involves reciprocity between present and past, since the historian is part of the present and the facts belong to the past. The historian and the facts of history are necessary to one another. The historian without his facts is rootless and futile; the facts without their historian are dead and meaningless. My first answer therefore to the question, ‘What is history?' is that it is a continuous process of interaction between the historian and his facts, an unending dialogue between the present and the past. (35)
Celebrating the very practices Herbert Butterfield had condemned thirty years earlier in The Whig Interpretation of History, Carr insisted that it was “the dual and reciprocal function of history to promote our understanding of the past in the light of the present and of the present in the light of the past.”i5 And since the present is shaped by our hopes for the future, history becomes a dialogue between “the events of the past and progressively emerging future ends.”i6 Carr thought histories that attempted to evade this self-conscious shuttling between past and present were inevitably “dead and barren.”i7
We have become accustomed to reading Carr's What Is History? against Geoffrey Elton's The Practice of History, published six years later:
The Burden of History”	173
Carr the progressive, Elton the conservative; Carr the rubbery relativist, Elton the defender of truth.18 And indeed, it is precisely when read against Elton’s response that Carr’s historicism, his understanding of history as an ever-evolving interrogation between past and present, seems so freshly perceptive and immediately relevant, even now, forty-some years after What Is History? first appeared. Oakeshott focused all his wit and fury on this issue when he wrote “The Emergence of the History of Thought” in 1967.
Oakeshott had first visited these issues in the 1930s; he returned to them in a 1951 commentary on Butterfield’s The Whig Interpretation of History and again ten years later in his initial review of What Is History? But it was not until “The Emergence” in 1967 that his thoughts really took wing.19 In Experience and Its Modes (1933), he had distinguished “the historical past” from what he called “the practical past.” By the latter he meant the past we create in order to make “valid practical beliefs about the present and the future, about the world in general.”20
Wherever the past is merely that which preceded the present, that from which the present has grown, wherever the significance of the past lies in the fact that it has been influential in deciding the present and the future fortunes of men, wherever the present is sought in the past, and wherever the past is regarded as merely a refuge from the present—the past involved is a practical, not a historical past.21 If the “practical past” is “naive”—at one point he even suggests that it “may arise from some dark deficiency of the imagination”—the “historical past” arises from impersonal interest and disinterested curiosity;22
The past for history [is] the past as the historian is accustomed to see it. And this past may be distinguished at once (distinguished from the practical past and from all other pasts) as the past for its own sake. History is the past for the sake of the past. What the historian is interested in is a dead past, a past unlike the present. . . . He is concerned with the past as past, and with each moment of the past in so far as it is unlike any other moment?3
Where the “practical past” is the past as prologue, the “historical past” is “the past for its own sake,” a “dead past,” a past stripped of any connection to present or future. Needless to say, this is not the kind of past that comes knocking on your door at two o’clock in the morning, a past that roars like a furnace or hurls Hebraic judgments; it’s not a past of midnight meditations on the saving power of remorse and regret; this
i74
DAVID HARLAN
is not a past that might ease our gnawing sorrows or steady our skittery compass. That kind of past—a normative past, a past that might be used for moral reflection—is completely alien to Oakeshott’s notion of a “truly historical past”—and to the professionalization of historical study that it made possible.24
But that was in 1933; when Oakeshott returned to these issues thirty-four years later, in “The Emergence of the History of Thought” (1967), his notion of the practical past had changed in subtle but important ways. It still has the same outlines and essential elements he had ascribed to it earlier, it is still “a hindrance and obstacle” to the emerging professionalization of historical studies, the chrysalis from which “a genuinely historical concern with the intellectual past” was even then struggling to free itself?5 But the hard-edged antipathy that marked his earlier pronouncements has given way to a deeper, more sympathetic understanding of the practical past. He now seems to recognize, as Nietzsche once said, that “history belongs above all to the man . . . who needs models, teachers, comforters and cannot find them among his contemporaries.’^6 We make our peace with death not by understanding it, Oakeshott admits, but “in the recollection that other and better men have passed that way. Xerxes did die, and so must ITh7 Rather than “some dark deficiency of the imagination,” the practical past has become our primary means of locating ourselves in time, even “the condition of all human self-consciousnessTh8
What is most interesting about Oakeshott’s reappraisal of the practical past is his unexpectedly sympathetic treatment of the ways in which earlier thinkers had evoked just this notion of the past in order to redefine themselves. For example, he is much taken with the way Aristotle, in Book I of the Physics, created an intellectual inheritance for himself:
This past evoked by Aristotle is composed of the ideas of those only whom he understood to be his intellectual forebears . . . And he uses those ideas as a means of identifying his own engagement, which thus becomes a passage in an inquiry which he did not begin and will not end. . . . It may be recognized as Aristotle locating himself, identifying himself and his own enterprise by evoking an intellectual past, an epic of physical speculation, to which he as a physicist claims to belong?9
The seventeenth-century Baconians did pretty much the same thing: never quite able to get over the disgrace of having been born in an “intel
The Burden of History”	175
lectual hovel”—the cultural compost of the Dark Ages—they redefined themselves and their philosophical-scientific achievements by choosing a different cultural inheritance, constructing a different pantheon of predecessors for themselves.30
But for all his sympathetic understanding of the uses of the “practical past,” Oakeshott still regarded this sort of thing as “intellectual legend-making,” one of those praetorian practices from which history would have to extricate itself—Oakeshott uses the word “surmount”—if it were to complete the process of professionalization and finally take its place in the new post-war world of the social sciences and the multiversities.
Oakeshott was trying to distinguish a “genuinely historical concern with the intellectual past” from the “naive interest in the past which any man whose main interest is in the present might be expected to show.” Only by freeing itself from the grip of the present and formulating its own seemingly disinterested approach to the past could history claim its rightful place as a truly autonomous discipline, with its own specialized modes of notation and representation?1 Paul Franco, Oakeshott’s most sympathetic and insightful biographer, claims that Oakeshott’s attempt to extricate professional history from its Whiggish past “represents one of the most profound treatments of history in the twentieth century.”32 Perhaps.33 Certainly the wedge Oakeshott drove between the “practical” and the “truly historical” was precisely what the process of professionalization required as it shifted into high gear in the 1960s?4 Certainly it was Oakeshott’s distinction that allowed academic history to establish itself as the sole authority over what counted as “history” and what did not; it would be professors of the “truly historical” who would pass judgment on how and why the past was invoked—and police those outlying practitioners of the “practical past” who continued to write as if history were still one of our primary modes of moral reflection. As White later explained:
The distinction between “the historical past” and “the practical past” was necessary for establishing history’s status as a (special) kind of scientific discipline, a discipline purified by the elimination of futuristic concerns, on the one hand, and excluded from making moral and aesthetic, not to mention political and social, judgments on the present, on the other. At the same time, professional historical inquiry, in the main or orthodox line of its development, set itself up as judge and arbiter of “practical” history.35
176 DAVID HARLAN
But what’s more interesting for our purposes is that just a few months before Oakeshott’s essay appeared, Hayden White had published “'The Burden of History.”
At the very moment that Oakeshott was working to transform history into an autonomous, self-authenticating, and rigorously professional discipline, White was calling on historians “to preside over the dissolution of history’s claim to autonomy among the disciplines.”36 White thought history had no way of knowing that was uniquely its own, and that every attempt to come up with one had only divided history against itself and deepened the discipline’s isolation, driving it further and further away from the insights and interests of the larger intellectual com-munity.37 And where Oakeshott insisted that historians must isolate the past, quarantine it from the present, pin it down, study it for its own sake—“What the historian is interested in is a dead past, a past unlike the present”—White argued that history’s only value lies in the relationship it constructs between past and present, that its only meaning lies in the temporal dimension it brings to our understanding of the pres-ent.38 As William Faulkner famously remarked, “The past is never dead. In fact, it’s not even past.”39 Whatever moral clarity the historian may claim, whatever street-level epiphanies and small-scale consolations she may offer, she offers to the present, as White explained in “The Burden of History”:
Anyone who studies the past as ‘an end in itself’ must appear as either an antiquarian, fleeing from the problems of the present into a purely personal past, or a kind of cultural necrophile, that is, one who finds in the dead and dying a value he can never find in the living. The contemporary historian has to establish the value of the study of the past, not as ‘an end in itself’ but as a way of providing perspectives on the present that contribute to the solutions to problems peculiar to our own time.40
It was not altogether surprising that White would call on the rising generation of historians, the men and women who were entering the profession in the late 1960s and early 1970s, to abandon history’s quest for a truly historical method of its own and set about redefining historical studies “on a basis that will make them consonant with the aims and purposes of the intellectual community at large.”'11 Nothing even remotely like that happened, of course. On the contrary, the professionalization of historical studies was just then embarking on its most spectacular expansion ever.
The Burden of History”	177
In the forty years since Hayden White wrote “The Burden of History,” Western historical thought has achieved worldwide hegemony.42 The central beliefs and assumptions, the mental habits and institutional procedures Oakeshott had described—especially the distinction between the “practical past” and the “historical past”—have become the basis for what the British historian Peter Burke recently described as “a global community of professional historians with similar if not identical standards of practice.”43 So what are we to make of “The Burden of History” after all these years? Were White’s hopes completely misplaced? Or was he perhaps thinking half a century ahead of his time?44
The Contestations of Faculties
In his introductory remarks about Peter Burke’s essay “Western Historical Thinking in a Global Perspective—io Theses,” the German historian Jorn Rusen pointed out that professional history’s achievement of global hegemony has come at precisely the moment when popular history—historical novels, films, and comics, Web sites, museums, and so on—is staging its most dramatic comeback ever. This is the “practical” history Oakeshott had hoped to bury, of course, and as Rusen exclaimed, it has returned “with a vengeance.”45 We see it in the United States especially. One could argue that Americans are more intensely interested in history now than they’ve ever been. Most of the museums in this country were built in the last quarter-century and they’re packed with visitors, day after day, week after week. The Holocaust Museum in Washington, D.C., has become a major tourist destination, with long lines snaking around the block and people standing in line for hours on end. An account recently published in the American Historical Review claims that the Holocaust Museum and others like it account for fully two-thirds of all the museums in the United States. “It is no stretch, except perhaps for our professional egos, to suppose that museums actually deliver more history, more effectively, more of the time, to more people than historians do.”46 The same thing is happening with historical films: Hollywood used to make two or three big-budget historical dramas a decade; now they turn out three or four a year, many of them very good movies by any standard. Even historical documentaries are reaching a mass audience, as the remarkable career of Ken Burns so richly demonstrates. Indeed, a career like
178 DAVID HARLAN
Burns’s would have been inconceivable twenty years ago. And historical fiction has become immensely popular; you’d have to go all the way back to the first half of the nineteenth century to find a time when Americans read historical novels as eagerly as they do now. Cold Mountain (1997), a dense, five-hundred-page historical novel set in the backwoods of North Carolina during the autumn of 1864, was the most commercially successful novel in recent memory.47 When it won the National Book Award in 1997, it edged out historical novels by such well-known writers as Caleb Carr, Don DeLillo, and Thomas Pynchon. And there were more the following spring, by some of the best writers in the country: Russell Banks, T. C. Boyle, Peter Carey, Charles Johnson, Elmore Leonard, Jane Smiley, Gore Vidal, and others. Six of the last thirteen National Book Awards and seven of the last thirteen National Book Critics Circle Awards have gone to historical novels. Even historical comics are enjoying a renaissance, Art Spiegelman’s Maus being only the best known of a growing genre. And the same thing is happening in the United Kingdom and Europe, across the same wide range of genres and with the same surprising intensity.48 As the Princeton historian Sean Wilentz recently pointed out, we now find ourselves in the middle of popular history’s “new golden age.”4°
We academic historians haven’t known quite what to make of all this. We are delighted to see so many people turning to the past, of course, but we tend to think that most of the films they’re watching and the novels they’re reading (to say nothing of the comics) are little more than historical melodramas, long on misty nostalgia but short on critical analysis. The professional journals do review historical films occasionally, though with a growing sense of professional and intellectual inadequacy. As the editor of the American Historical Review (AHR) recently explained, “our reviewers have usually been historians with little training or expertise in film studies and often with little interest in the medium other than as moviegoers.” Given which, they tend to concentrate on the historical accuracy of the films they review and ignore everything else—“something which those with a deep interest in film are quick to point out.”50 In May of 2006 Robert Schneider, the editor of the AHR, announced a temporary suspension of film reviews, for the reasons mentioned above. As of April 2007, the AHR had not published a film review for over two years. Historical novels? The mainline historical journals almost never review them, a 1998 AHR forum on Margaret Atwood’s novel Alias Grace
The Burden of History”	179
being the only significant exception. On the rare occasion when they do, the reviewers they choose tend to be practicing historians with little or no knowledge of literary criticism. So, like their colleagues doing film reviews, they rarely venture beyond the most obvious questions of factual accuracy. As James Goodman recently explained,
Historians are not, by and large, interested in what most interests novelists: the sound of words, imagery, the shape of the story, voice. They approach fiction no differently than they approach history, discussing what the novelist got right and what he or she got wrong, the analytic ends but not the literary means, the content but not the form.51
Sean Wilentz recently wrote a cover essay for the New Republic titled “America Made Easy: McCulloch, Adams, and the Decline of Popular History.”52 It was an odd title, because Wilentz wasn’t worried about the decline of popular history so much as its re-emergence: historical amateurs flooding the country with Hollywood docudramas and comic books posing as history books?3 As Wilentz sees it, most of these new histories are little more than a sticky-sweet compound of cheap sentimentalism and soppy-eyed spectacle: appreciative rather than critical, descriptive rather than analytical, reassuring rather than demanding—and worst of all, intellectually debilitating. It is a fashionable and pleasing history that does little more than regurgitate and reconfirm the petty platitudes and self-serving mythologies of the dominant culture—in other words, precisely what Oakeshott dismissed as “practical” history?4 We may be witnessing “a new golden age of historical popularization,” but Wilentz thinks that golden age has produced little more than a vacant lot heaped with rubbish.55
Perhaps. But if academic history hopes to avoid what looks more and more like a terminal estrangement from the larger intellectual community, if it hopes to have a hand in shaping historical consciousness in the years to come, it will have to negotiate some terms of accommodation with the rising influence of popular history. For it is in the yet-to-be-defined relationship between academic history, with its self-isolating professional pretensions, and the proliferation of popular histories, in virtually every developed country of the world, that the past—or rather, our various and mutually canceling pasts—will be shaped and defined. The history of history through the end of the twentieth century may indeed be a narrative describing the rise of academic history to global hegemony,
l8O DAVID HARLAN
but if the profession hopes to survive as something more than a priestly cult of declining relevance, it will have to make the history of history through the first decades of the twenty-^Th century something different: a narrative of the periodic and various accommodations that local academic communities have managed to forge with the popular—what Oakeshott used to call the “practical”—historical cultures that surround them.
In the increasingly urgent necessity of coming to terms with popular, nonacademic history, we begin to see the real importance of what Hayden White has been trying to tell us all these years. From “'The Burden of History” in 1966, with its call to “reestablish the dignity of historical studies on a basis that will make them consonant with the aims and purposes of the intellectual community at large,” to “The Public Relevance of Historical Studies” in 2005, with its call for “a return to the intimate relationship [History] once had with art, poetry, rhetoric, and ethical reflection prior to professionalization,” Hayden White, more than anyone else in the field, has been urging us to come to terms with the various and varied forms of historical representation bubbling up all around us.56 Nothing like that happened in the mid-1960s, of course; indeed, the profession turned its face in the opposite direction. But things are different this time around: the new popular history is proliferating far too rapidly, has saturated the surrounding culture far too thoroughly, and has become far too prominent for academic historians to continue ignoring it. And its practitioners are making increasingly sophisticated claims to intellectual legitimacy, claims that can no longer be dismissed with the sort of smug and sweeping contempt with which Sean Wilentz dismissed them. After all, it’s academic historians who are in danger of becoming a priestly caste, not those untenured laymen doing history outside the cast-iron boundaries of the discipline.
The future of academic history depends, to a very large degree, on the shifting accommodations it manages to forge with the growing, increasingly heterogeneous and divergent communities of practitioners who are writing, drawing, filming, producing, archiving, and exhibiting history outside the walls of the academy. Dipesh Chakrabarty, the University of Chicago historian, has given us a glimpse of what this coming “contestation of faculties” may look like:
To the degree that the media and other institutions of popular culture today (such as films, television, internet, museums, and so on) challenge the hegemony
The Burden of History”	181
of the university as the producer and disseminator of research and knowledge by setting up parallel institutions that, socially speaking, serve the same function with respect to the past, narratives about the past will have many different sources authorizing them. In the contestation of faculties that takes place in the cultural turmoil of mass-democracies . . . universities may very well seek different kinds of accommodation with popular culture in different social and national contexts. Out of that process may emerge a global culture of professional history that will not be identical all over the world.”57
A Map of the Historian’s
Rapidly Expanding Territories
We historians like to think of ourselves as “practitioners,” members of a first-order discipline engaged in the professional production of original and reliable knowledge about the past.58 We assume that our most important responsibility is to convey this professionally certified knowledge to our undergraduates, and the techniques for producing it to our graduate students—in other words, we are there to teach them how to read and write academic history. A new and in many ways a more vibrant history is being produced outside the walls of the academy, by novelists, memoirists, autobiographers, comic book authors, filmmakers, curators, and the like. If we intend to meet the challenge of this new history—which is to say, after all, that if we wish our students to develop historical imaginations that are personally sustaining, socially relevant, and politically engaged—we must teach them to be thoughtful, critical, reflective, resourceful readers of all the forms in which their society represents the past to itself. Academic history is one of those forms, of course, but it is only one, and for most of the history-consuming public, and for most of our undergraduates, it is neither the most interesting nor the most important.
What we need now is a map of our rapidly expanding area of responsibility. Such a map would, first and most obviously, identify the major forms of historical representation, both established and emerging, and explain the advantages, limitations, and responsibilities peculiar to each one. Second, it would, hopefully, describe the codes and conventions that govern representation and evaluation in each of these realms—thereby reminding us of what we already know but too often forget: that the cri
l82
DAVID HARLAN
teria for evaluating any representation of the past must be both mediaspecific and genre-specific. We simply do not have a set of meta-criteria that we can apply to any and every form of historical representation. The criteria we have developed for evaluating written history, for example, do not work very well when it comes to evaluating history-on-film, as Robert Schneider’s explanation of why the American Historical Review has suspended film reviews so vividly demonstrates. Like every other realm of historical representation, history-on-film will have to develop its own criteria for determining what counts as good history and what does not.59
Finally, such a map would help us understand the relationships between a culture’s various modes of historical representation. How, for example, should we understand the different forms of meaning and understanding generated by Oliver Stone’s film Nixon (1995) and David Greenberg’s book Nixon's Shadow: The History of the Image (2003). Both offer informative and insightful accounts of the man and his presidency, but they have very different things to tell us about those subjects, and they tell us in very different ways. What can we learn from the one that we can’t learn from the other? And more generally, what can we learn from historical films that we cannot learn from historical novels or historical monographs? And how should we conceptualize the relationship between them? History-on-film is obviously more than a supplement to written history. As the historian and film critic Robert Rosenstone once put it, film stands adjacent to written history, at a location whose coordinates are yet to be specified.60 A map of the historians’ rapidly expanding territories would help us specify those coordinates—that is, the map would delineate and describe the relationships between the culture’s primary modes of historical representation.
And with this we finally arrive at the heart of the matter. If our students are to become thoughtful, critical, and resourceful readers of the past in a culture whose forms of historical representation are becoming ever more varied, dispersed, and eclectic, they will have to become adept at finding their way between competing but equally valid truth claims made in distinct and often divergent modes of representation. It is not so much a commitment to the dead that they need, or even to the truth; what they need now are the skills of the bricoleur. They must become sophisticated multimedia ragpickers, quick, shrewd, witty readers of all the forms in which their culture represents the past, shuttling back and forth,
The Burden of History”	183
to and fro, cutting and pasting, weaving and reweaving interpretive webs of their own devising. For only thus can they hope to develop a historical imagination that is morally coherent and politically effective—a historical imagination that can help them say, “This is how we mean to live but do not yet live; this is what we mean to value but do not yet value.”61
Notes
1.	Edith Wyschogrod, An Ethics of Remembering: History, Heterology, and the Nameless Other (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1998), xi, 22. Note that E. P. Thompson had said much the same thing nearly a half-century ago:
I am seeking to rescue the poor stockinger, the Luddite cropper, the ‘obsolete’ hand-loom weaver, the ‘utopian’ artisan, and even the deluded follower of Joanna Southcott from the enormous condescension of posterity. Their crafts and traditions may have been dying. Their hostility to the new industrialism may have been backward-looking. Their communitarian ideals may have been fantasies. Their insurrectionary conspiracies may have been foolhardy. But they lived through these times of acute social disturbance, and we did not. E. P. Thompson, The Making of the English Working Class (New York: Victor Gollancz, 1963), 12-13.
Observe also that this notion of indebtedness has always been contested, at least since the early nineteenth century: “The exponents of realistic historicism— Hegel, Balzac, and Tocqueville, to take representatives from philosophy, the novel, and historiography respectively—agreed that the task of the historian was less to remind men of their obligation to the past than to force upon them an awareness of how the past could be used to effect an ethically responsible transition from present to future.” Hayden White, “The Burden of History,” History and Theory 5:2 (1966): 132.
2.	For an eloquent exploration of “the paradox that, on the one hand, there is no straightforward way to match our propositions about events with events themselves, yet, on the other hand, the historian is justified in claiming she can tell the truth,” see Wyschogrod, An Ethics of Remembering, 3. For an interesting discussion of the relation of truth and being in a culture of information, see ibid., io8ff. For a critical response to Wyschogrod, see Allan Megill, “Some Aspects of the Ethics of History: Reflections on Edith Wyschogrod’s An Ethics of Remembering',' in The Ethics of History, ed. David Carr, Thomas R. Flynn, and Rudolf A. Makkreel (Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press, 2004), 45-75.
3.	Allan Megill, “Some Aspects of the Ethics of History,” 49. “The guiding idea,” as Frank Ankersmit recently explained, “is that the historian should be
184 DAVID HARLAN
a mere mirror of the past. As Lucianus himself argued: ‘the historian should resemble a clear, well-polished and reliable mirror, rendering the images of the past exactly how it has perceived them and without changing anything as to their forms and colour. What the historian must tell us is independent of his arbitrary preferences; the events of the past have always been there, they have happened already and have to be recounted.'” Ankersmit, “The Ethics of History: From the Double Binds of (Moral) Meaning to Experience,” History and Theory, 43 (December 2004): 84—102. Postmodernism has pretty much demolished this classical notion of objectivity, of course (see Brian Fay's introduction to The Ethics of History and Hans Kellner's review of same), though see Carr's much earlier discussion of “truth” as a function of what he calls the “reciprocal” exchange between past and present (for example, in Carr, What Is History? [New York: Random House, 1961], I75ff.). Thomas Nagel probably put our present position as succinctly as anyone has: “if truth is our aim, we must be resigned to achieving it to a very limited extent, and without certainty.” Thomas Nagel, The View From Nowhere (New York: Oxford University Press, 1986), 10.
4.	Arthur Danto, Narration and Knowledge (New York: Columbia University Press, 1985), 341. All of which is, of course, not to suggest that the past is given, if for no other reason than because, as Danto so eloquently demonstrated in his Analytical Philosophy of History, the past will always be differently described because its relation to the present is constantly changing.
5.	Allan Megill, “Some Aspects of the Ethics of History,” 45—75.
6.	My emphasis. Hans Kellner, Review of The Ethics of History, by David Carr, Thomas R. Flynn, and Rudolf A. Makkreel, ed., CLIO 35:2 (Spring 2006): 263.
7.	This subheading is taken from E. H. Carr, as quoted by Michael Oake-shott, What Is History? The original passage reads, “Good historians, I suspect, whether they think about it or not, have the future in their bones.” E. H. Carr, What Is History? I43.
8.	See Munslow's review of the new edition of What Is History? in History in Focus, 2 (Autumn 2001), available online at http://www.history.ac.uk/ihr/Focus/ Whatishistory/carri.html.
9.	Oakeshott, “What Is History?” reprinted in Oakeshott, What Is History? And Other Essays, 319, 332.
10.	Carr, What Is History? I09, I59.
11.	Ibid., 98. Outside the discipline of history, Carr is known, somewhat paradoxically, as a “realist.” Indeed, one commentator even goes so far as to claim that “E. H. Carr is undoubtedly the doyen of English realism in international relations, to the extent that he has become emblematic, almost a caricature, of that tendency.” See David Boucher's review of E. H. Carr and International Relations: A Duty to Lie, by Charles Jones, American Political Science Review 93:4 (December, i999): i020.
The Burden of History”	185
12.	Walt Whitman, Poetry and Prose, ed. Justin Kaplan (New York: Library of America College Edition, 1996'), 274—75: “Of the terrible doubt of appearances, / Of the uncertainty, after all, that we may be deluded, / That may-be reliance and hope are all but speculations after all.”
13.	Carr, What Is History? 159. Note, however, that Carr did consider history to be one of the social sciences. See, for example, ibid., 158.
14.	Carr, What Is History? 159; Richard Rorty, Contingency, Irony, and Solidarity (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989), 29.
15.	Ibid., 166.
16.	Ibid.
17.	Ibid., 141. Butterfield famously condemned “the tendency in many histo-
rians . . . to emphasize certain principles of progress in the past and to produce a story which is a ratification if not the glorification of the present.” He thought “the study of the past with one eye, so to speak, upon the present is the source of all sins and sophistries in history....It is the very sum and definition of all
errors of historical inference....It is the essence of what we mean by the word
‘unhistorical.’” Herbert Butterfield, The Whig Interpretation of History (1931; repr. New York: Norton, 1965), v, 31-32.
18.	“Currently the field is held by two books published thirty or more years ago by the British historians Edward Hallett Carr and Sir Geoffrey Elton.” Richard J. Evans, In Defense of History (New York: Norton, 1999), 1.
19.	Some scholars have argued that Oakeshott’s philosophy of history does not cohere until “Three Essays on History” in 1983. See, for example, Paul Franco, Michael Oakeshott: An Introduction (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2004), 140.
20.	Oakeshott, Experience and Its Modes (Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, 1966), 104-05.
21.	Ibid., 103.
22.	Ibid., 104-105; Oakeshott, “The Whig Interpretation of History” (1951) in What Is History? And Other Essays (Charlottesville, VA: Imprint Academic, 2004), 220.
23.	Oakeshott, Experience and Its Modes, 106. Heidegger, of course, would have denied any distinction between a practical and a historical past. For Heidegger, Habermas, Rorty, and others, Oakeshott’s “practical past” is the only past we can possibly have, the past as part of what Heidegger calls Lebenswelt and Habermas calls “lifeworld,” the informal background of culturally grounded understandings, competences, practices, and attitudes that make us “lifeworldly” (Habermas’s term). On Heidegger’s notion of Liebenswelt see Jurgen Habermas, The Philosophical Discipline of Modernity: Twelve Lectures, trans. Frederick G. Lawrence (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1998), 143—60; on Habermas’s own understanding of “lifeworld,” see ibid., 298—327. For an interesting discussion of Habermas’s notion of “lifeworld,” see Omid A. Payrow Shabani, Democracy,
i86
DAVID HARLAN
Power, and Legitimacy: The Critical Theory of Jurgen Habermas (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2003), 84-96.
24.	Oakeshott, Experience and Its Modes, 103.
25.	Oakeshott thought that “a genuinely historical concern” with the past “may be observed to be emerging during the nineteenth-century and, in some respects, may be said not yet to have got very far.” Oakeshott, What Is History? And Other Essays, 365. “The intellectual past had to be released from its servitude” to the practical past. Ibid., 369.
26.	Friedrich Nietzsche, Untimely Meditations, ed. Daniel Breazeale (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004), 67.
27.	Oakeshott, What Is History? And Other Essays, 349.
28.	Ibid., 346. These ideas are most fully developed in Oakeshott’s On History and Other Essays (Oxford: Blackwell, 1983).
29.	Oakeshott, What Is History? 351.
30.	Ibid., 359.
31.	As Luke O’Sullivan explained, “In On History as in Experience and Its Modes Oakeshott aims to present historical understanding as sui generis and entirely distinct from the modes of understanding found in practical life or science, or for that matter, philosophy.” Luke O’Sullivan, Oakeshott on History (Exeter, UK: Imprint Academic, 2003), 221.
32.	Paul Franco, Michael Oakeshott: An Introduction (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2004), 140. See also Paul Franco, Hegel’s Philosophy of Freedom (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2002), 346-48. Oakeshott’s “Three Essays on History” was first published in Oakeshott, On History and Other Essays (London: Blackwell, 1983).
33.	Note, however, that because Oakeshott has most often been thought of as a Thatcherite conservative, his reputation has to some extent risen and fallen with the political tides.
34.	It was, by the way, a highly gendered distinction, one which stigmatized the “practical” as soft, naive, etc. and the “truly historical” held up as trained, efficient, and hard-headed.
35.	White, “The Public Relevance of Historical Studies: A Reply to Dirk Moses,” History and Theory 44 (October 2005): 334.
36.	White, “The Burden of History,” 112. For White’s most recent comments on Oakeshott, see White, “The Public Relevance of Historical Studies,” 334—35.
37.	White, “The Burden of History,” 124.
38.	Ibid., 132.
39.	Faulkner, in his 1951 novel, Requiem for a Nun, as reprinted in Faulkner: Novels, ic>42—ic)54 (New York: Library of America, 1994), 535. Oakeshott is generally thought of as a conservative, both culturally and politically (he was an outspoken supporter of Margaret Thatcher in the 1980s). It is unusual to see a conservative urging such a complete break with the past—though maybe not so
The Burden of History”	187
strange in Oakeshott’s case because his mentor Herbert Butterfield had urged us to the same repudiation. For whatever reason, Butterfield and Oakeshott forgot what Faulkner never forgot: that every present is deeply rooted in the past, indeed, that the present is haunted by a past that defies every attempt to renovate or extirpate it, a past that continues to replicate itself in the minds of the living, over and over again, world without end. In his novel Pylon (1935) Faulkner has his narrator remark, “only the moment, the instant [dead]: the substance itself not only not dead, not complete, but in its very insoluble enigma of human folly and blundering possessing a futile and tragic immortality.” William Faulkner: Novels, 1930—35, ed. Joseph Blotner and Noel Polk (New York: Literary Classics of the United States, 1985), 832.
40.	White, “The Burden of History,” 125.
41.	Ibid., 124.
42.	Peter Burke, “Western Historical Thinking in a Global Perspective— 10 Theses,” in Western Historical Thinking: An Intercultural Debate, ed. Jorn Rusen (New York: Berghahn Books, 2002), 15-30.
43.	Burke, “Western Historical Thinking,” 17.
44.	White thinks—and has always thought—that professional historiography has been absolutely central to Western civilization’s sense of its own cultural superiority. As early as 1973 he had argued that “the historical consciousness on which Western man has prided himself since the beginning of the nineteenthcentury may be little more than a theoretical basis for the ideological position from which Western civilization views its relationship not only to cultures and civilizations preceding it but also to those contemporary with it in time and contiguous with it in space. In short, it is possible to view historical consciousness as a specifically Western prejudice by which the presumed superiority of modern industrial society can be retroactively substantiated.” White, Metahistory, 2.
45.	Jorn Rusen, preface to Western Historical Thinking: An Intercultural Debate, ed. Jorn Rusen (New York: Berghahn Books, 2002), particularly vii. But see also xii, where Rusen acknowledges the emergence of “other cultural, but non-academic, practices of ‘sense formation’ as being equally important forms of human orientation and self-understanding (in their general function not much different from the efforts of academic thought itself).”
46.	Randolph Starn, “A Historian’s Brief Guide to New Museum Studies,” American Historical Review 110:1 (February 2005): 68.
47.	Bruce Cook, “Peeps Into the Past,” Washington Post, July 18, 1999, X4.
48.	Richard Evans, “How History Became Popular Again,” New Statesman, February 12, 2001, 25-27.
49.	Sean Wilentz, “America Made Easy: McCulloch, Adams, and the Decline of Popular History,” New Republic 225:1 (July 2, 2001): 36.
50.	Robert A. Schneider, “On Film Reviews in the AHR,” Perspectives, May 2006, http://www.historians.org/Perspectives/issues/2006/0605/0605aha2.cfm.
i88
DAVID HARLAN
51.	James Goodman, review of Novel History: Historians and Novelists Confront America’s Past (andEach Other), by Mark C. Carnes, ed., American Historical Review 107:2 (April 2002): 502.
52.	Wilentz, “America Made Easy,” 35-40.
53.	By “decline,” he actually meant that while popular history has indeed staged a remarkable return, its quality has declined.
54.	Oakeshott, “The Emergence of the History of Thought,” in What Is History? (see note 8), 365.
55.	There are doubters, of course: Brian Fay, the longtime editor of History and Theory, thinks these “unconventional histories” have the capacity to both deepen academic history and extend its reach. But among mainstream academic historians, he and others who share his sensibility comprise a distinct minority.
56.	White, “The Burden of History,” 124; White, “The Public Relevance of Historical Studies,” 335. I don't mean that this is the only thing he has been trying to tell us. In the years that followed “The Burden of History” (1966), White developed a rigorously formalist model of the historical imagination. He still thought of historical accounts as acts of the moral imagination, but he now argued that the imagination itself is structured and governed by an underlying set of mental categories that are both a priori and universal. This was the understanding of historical imagination that underlay and informed Metahistory (1973), Tropics of Discourse (1978), and The Content of the Form (1987). (Though see F. R. Ankersmit's very different interpretation in his Historical Representation [Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2002]). What gave White's account such vivid life and made it so deeply interesting was the tension between his humanist insistence on the freedom of the imagination and his structuralist insistence that acts of the imagination are governed by “the deep structures” of human consciousness. In the late 1980s and early 1990s, however, he began moving away from what was by then a rather antiquated formalism. In 1992 he published an elusive and widely misunderstood essay titled “Historical Emplotment and the Problem of Truth” in Probing the Limits of Representation: Nazism and the “Final Solution,” ed. Saul Friedlander (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1992), 37—53. In that essay White returned to his earlier conviction that historical writing is essentially a form of moral reflection, a way of coming to terms with ourselves, a means of dealing with “the blind impress” that history has stamped on our foreheads. This is the Hayden White who once wrote that “the moral implications of the human sciences will never be perceived until the faculty of the will is reinstated in theory” (White, introduction to Tropics of Discourse, 23); it is the Hayden White who used to insist that stories about the past constitute the most basic unifying structures of the self, and that rethinking the past is a way of rethinking ourselves and reordering our values (Ralph Cohen, ed., Th e Future of Literary Theory, xvii). And see White, “Writing in the Middle-Voice,” Stanford Literary Review 9 (1992). On redescribing ourselves by redescribing our
The Burden of History”	189
past, see Hayden White, “What Is a Historical System?” in Biology, History and Natural Philosophy, ed. Allen D. Breck and Wolfgang Yourgrau (New York: Plenum Press, 1972), especially his discussion of what he calls “retrospective ancestral substitution.”
57.	Dipesh Chakrabarty, “A Global and Multicultural ‘Discipline of History'?” History and Theory 45:1 (2006): 109.
58.	I have borrowed the distinction between “first-order disciplines” and “second-order disciplines” from Mortimer J. Adler, “Philosophy's Past,” in The Four Dimensions of Philosophy (New York: Macmillan, 1993). Adler writes that “first-order disciplines” employ a common methodology to produce empirical knowledge about a specifically defined subject matter. “Second-order disciplines” concern themselves with the critical examination of concepts, methods, and assumptions used by first-order disciplines. That's not to say that they presume to resolve disputes within first-order disciplines so much as to midwife them (The analogy is Socrates' as as recounted by Plato in The Theaetetus: “The god constrains me to play the part of midwife to others, but does not allow me to have a family myself.” The Theaetetus of Plato, translated by F. A. Paley [London: George Bell and Sons, 1875], 16. A marvelous image that Socrates embellishes on this and the following page.).
59.	For an interesting progress report on precisely this project, see Robert Rosenstone, History on Film/Film on History (London: Longman, 2006), and the special issue of Rethinking History 11:4 (December 2007) which includes commentaries on Rosenstone's book by Robert Burgoyne, Vivian Bickford-Smith, Leen Engelen, and Guy Westwell.
60.	I am indebted to Robert Rosenstone for this formulation, as for so many other insights. See Rosenstone's important statement “The Historical Film as Real History,” Film-Historia 1:1 (1995), especially 21—22. For a popular expression of the idea that film and video are, in fact, replacing the written text, see Sven Birkerts, The Gutenberg Elegies: The Fate of Reading in an Electronic Age (Boston: Faber and Faber, 1994). For a deeper, more compelling (and enthusiastic) analysis by a partisan of what he interprets as the “video revolution,” see Steven Johnson, Interface Culture: How New Technology Transforms the Way We Create and Communicate (San Francisco: Harper Edge, 1997).
61.	I have borrowed these words from Michael Walzer, The Company of Critics (New York: Basic, 1988), 230.