Editor’s Introduction
Choosing the Past: Hayden White and the Philosophy of History
Robert Doran
In choosing our past, we choose a present; and vice versa.
—Hayden White 1973 was a fateful year for historical studies and in particular for the much-maligned genre of philosophy of history. It was the year Hayden White’s Metahistory: The Historical Imagination in Nineteenth-Century Europe appeared: “the book around which all reflective historians must reorganize their thoughts on history,” wrote Louis Mink just a few weeks after its publication. The feeling was prescient: forty years later, Metahistory has lost none of its power to provoke controversy or inspire new thinking. It has so transformed the philosophical view of history that one of the contributors to the present volume, F R. Ankersmit, has written that “[Metahistory] has been the unparalleled success story of all twentieth century philosophy of history”1 and that “contemporary philosophy of history is mainly what [Hayden] White has made it.”2 Though White’s thought is certainly not reducible to Metahistory—three subsequent collections of essays amplified, developed, and recalibrated the ideas put forth in his magnum opus (a fourth volume, published in 2010, brought together White’s major uncollected essays spanning his entire career)—his contribution to the philosophy of history genre is generally considered to be his 1973 tome.3 Thepresent volumeexamines“philos op hy of history afterllaydcn White” in two senses of the preposition “after”: 1) philosophy of history according to White—namely, how White completely redefined the concept of philosophy of history in his many books and essays; and 2) what philosophy of history has become as a result of White’s interventions: how his reconception has had, and
2
Philosophy of History After Hayden White
continues to have, profound, far-reaching effects in diverse areas of inquiry, opening up new and often unexpected avenues of thought.
The contributors to this collection represent a range of diseiplines and subfields: in phiiosophy, Arthur Danto (Analytic tradition) and Gianni Vattimo (Continentai tradition); in historical theory and rhetoric, Frank Ankersmit and Hans Kellner; in literary theory and visual culture, Mieke Bai; in cultural theory and trauma studies, Karyn Ball; in East Asian studies, Harry Harootunian; in medieval history and historiography, Gabrielle Spiegel; and in British history and historiography, Richard Vann (longtime editor of the groundbreaking journal History and Theory). Indeed, this diversity of perspectives, which includes both practicing historians and theorists,4 testifies to White's unmatched ability to bring historical theory to a wide audience though his engagement with a multitude of seemingly heterogeneous discourse genres: nineteenthcentury German philosophy, existentialism, historicism, French structuralist and poststructuralist thought, Anglo-American philosophy, Italian philosophy, literary history, literary theory, rhetoric, hermeneutics, and aesthetics—a supreme example of intellectual eclecticism that has become increasingly rare in an age of specialization.
Though Whites work Sss bonn t:onirovessiai tn historiceistudict, sliriting a mixture of scorn and admiration, his books, particularly those from the 1970s, Metahistory and Tropics of Discourse, are standard reading in courses on historiography and historical methodologies. In literary studies and other fields where “theory” became a prime concern, it is White's later work, namely The Content of the Form and Figural Realism, that has been influential. While it is possible to discern a shift in perspective in White's oeuvre—from a theory of historical writing based on tropes to a theory of historical narrative and representation, a shift mirrored in the arc of his professional career, from his early affiliation with departments of history to his later membership in departments of literature and rhetoric—his enduring engagement with philosophy of history is a constant, if sometimes repressed, feature of his thought. It is as apparent in his critique of the “theory” wielded by non-historians, who often see “history” as “free of the kind of epistemological and methodological disputes that agitate their own area of inquiry,”5 as in his critique of the scientistic pretensions of historical practice, which challenges historians to see history and literature not as antithetical, but as cellmates in the prison-house of narrative.
hn C1s1s mtrbdnstio n, s dtseribe howWhiSe revolutionizad the nbiloaophy of history, transforming a highly specialized and rather arcane subject into a topic of central concern in the humanities. This volume thus endeavors to break new
Choosing the Past: Hayden White and the Philosophy of History
3
ground in its insistence on the ways in which the philosophy of history is still a vibrant mode of intellectual inquiry, even if its influence is often imperceptible and despite the fact that many of the traditional (i.e. metaphysical) aims of philosophical history have been abandoned.6
The vicissitudes of philosophy of history
Both the philosophy of history and the establishment of history as an academic discipline have their origins in the emergence of a “historical consciousness” in the nineteenth century. This consciousness was rooted, on the one hand, in the philosophical reflections of Giambattista Vico (1668-1744), Johann Gottfried Herder (1744-1803), and G. W F. Hegel (1770-1831), and, on the other, in the development of the historical and realist novel in England and France, in particular the works of Sir Walter Scott (1771-1832), Honore de Balzac (1799-1850), and Stendhal (1783-1842). However, a case could be made that the origins of philosophy of history go back to Saint Augustine's De Civitate Dei (City of God)—a book that sought to reinterpret history in light of the Visigoths' devastating attack on Rome in 410, which many saw as punishment for the abandonment of paganism in favor of Christianity—and to the establishment of the Anno Domini (a.d.) dating system in 525, which placed Christ's birth at the symbolic center of history. The relation between the institution of Christianity and a philosophical view of history is a strong one, and I will have occasion to return to it later in this introduction.7
It shouldne noted that, turoughoutmost ofits history, philosyphyhas not considered history a proper object of philosophical reflection. As the Greeks had defined it, philosophy (metaphysics) is the quest for timeless truth, for the immutable reality behind shifting appearances, whereas history is a matter of the contingent, the ever-changing, the singular, and the particular. On this view, history is deeply antithetical to philosophy. Thus the idea that history could yield philosophical insights or even become a part of philosophical inquiry signaled a fundamental break with the Greek and Cartesian traditions, a break that the Christian tradition of Saint Augustine would effectively symbolize.
Wu shoaio alsurumemyerrhat prioh toihe ninth cnth cenhury Motory was considered a branch of rhetoric, a “literary”8 genre practiced mostly by dabblers and dilettantes. A Gibbon or a Voltaire was certainly the exception, though their work is generally viewed as a kind of poetic historiography. History was also an integral part of the social education of young aristocrats, who saw it as a
4
Philosophy of History After Hayden White
fund of inspirational models and the common wisdom. This all changed when Leopold von Ranke (1795-1886) sought to professionalize the study of history by grounding it in a rigorous, empirical approach to the past, that is, one based on primary sources and archival research. On the one hand, Ranke aimed to separate history from the literary genres, in particular from the popular form of novel, and, on the other, from all generalizing propositions, especially those of the so-called “speculative” philosophy of history (e.g. Hegel and Marx), but also of the positive sciences of the era, which subscribed to mechanistic theories of explanation. As Ranke famously stated, the historian should aspire to present the past “as it really was,” which meant restricting oneself as much as possible to the particulars, to the “facts,” while purging historical writing of all fictional, dilettantish, and extrinsic elements. This objectivist vision (value-neutral historical knowledge), which lent to the study of history a quasi-scientific aura, led directly to the establishment of history as an academic discipline such as we know it today. However, as White would point out in his Metahistory, Ranke's objectivism was in fact an implicit “philosophy of history.” That is to say, the “objective” view of historical practice was not neutral or commonsensical but presupposed a particular—and rather dubious—ontological view, namely the idea of an absolute, mind-independent “historical reality” that could be conjured, judged, and communicated as such in its immediacy. Furthermore, as White noted, Ranke's advocacy of the narrative form as the most “natural” or “transparent” medium of representation borrowed heavily from the mimetic techniques of novelists, particularly writers of historical fiction, whom Ranke disparaged as fabulists.
argLely due to Ranke's intervention, philosophy of history and professional historiography developed along divergent paths, with little or no cross-fertilization. Philosophers such as Marx and Nietzsche viewed professional historians as naive or servile, whereas historians, following Ranke's model, saw philosophy of history as a threat to their putative objectivity and to their monopoly over the proper way of ascribing meaning to history; for theirs was a minimalist meaning that cleaved as closely as possible to the “facts.” The explicit aim of philosophy of history, on the other hand, was to give an overarching meaning to history, under which it subsumed the particulars unearthed by the historian; it thus considered history as a whole. In its classical, “speculative” form, that is, as practiced by Hegel and Marx, and more recently by Croce, Spengler, and Toynbee, this meant describing the grand shape of history, often taking into account huge swaths of historical time. Speculative history believed that history's directionality could be discerned and humanity's fate predicted; in short, it offered a
Choosing the Past: Hayden White and the Philosophy of History
5
universalizing, totalizing, and normative view of the course of human civilization (though, unsurprisingly, it privileged Western civilization, seeking to justify the West's perceived exceptionality, superiority, and inevitability). It is in this sense that Saint Augustine can be considered to be the “founder of the philosophy of history,” as Christopher Dawson, a mid-twentieth century British Catholic historian and thinker who deeply influenced White, observed: “[Saint Augustine] does not discover anything from history, but merely sees in history the working out of universal principles. But we may well question whether Hegel or any of the nineteenth-century philosophers did otherwise. They did not derive their theories from history, but read their philosophy into history”9 The philosopher of history endows history with an extrinsic meaning-structure, whereas the historian proper, post-Ranke, sees historical meaning as inhering in the historical particulars themselves.10
However,Dawson refused theopposbion between what he c ailed “nretahbtory” and “pure history,” arguing that “if history had been left to these pure historians, it would never have attained the position it holds in the modern world,”11 that is to say, it would have resulted in mere antiquarianism; “it was only when history entered into relations with philosophy and produced the new type of philosophical historians. that it became one of the great formative elements in modern thought.”12 In other words, every great historian is in some sense a philosopher of history. Though Dawson may not have coined the term “metahistory,” he was perhaps the first to give it a positive meaning, in his conclusion that “all historiography is... pervaded by metahistorical influences,”13 a point that Wnite would develop in elaborate and spectacular fashion in his Metahistory: The Historical Imagination in Nineteenth-Century Europe, which examines the work of four philosophers of history (philosophers who take a strong interest in history) and four “philosophical historians” (in Dawson's sense). In fact, one can read Dawson's brief (seven-page) essay “The Problem of Metahistory” (1951), from which the above quotations are taken, as a kind of manifesto for the systematic transformation of the philosophy of history that Wnite would undertake in the 1970s. awsDon was reacting to the low esteem in which philosophy of history was held during the first half of the twentieth century, particularly in Anglo-American thought. He felt that academic historians had become increasingly disconnected from the philosophical roots of their discipline, from the grand visions that had made history “formative” for modern thought. Suspecting that the animosity toward metahistory was due more to the particular philosophical views advocated by metahistorians than to the metahistorical approach per se, Dawson observes that
6
Philosophy of History After Hayden White
historians today are in revolt against the metahistory of Hegel and Croce and Collingwood, not because it is metahistorical, but because they feel it to be the expression of a philosophical attitude that is no longer valid; just as the liberal historians of the eighteenth century revolted against the theological metahistory of the previous period.14
In an essay published the same year as his Metahistory entitled “The Politics of Contemporary Philosophy of History” (1973), White echoes this sentiment, contending that “the term metahistorical is really a surrogate for ‘socially innovative historical vision.' What the philosophers and the historians themselves call ‘straight' history is the historical vision of political and social accommoda-tionists.”15 In other words, according to both Dawson and White, the distinction between so-called “straight” history and metahistory is really a distinction between a conformist and a radical-revolutionary approach to history, with “metahistory” (used pejoratively) referring to a radical-revolutionary approach that had either failed or simply been abandoned. Straight history, then, was successful metahistory.
This expiains, in part, thevery negative view evinced by many tv^e^ntieth-century Anglo-American philosophers toward metahistory or “speculative philosophy of history.” Thus Karl Popper dedicated his The Poverty of Historicism (1936/57) to the “memory of the countless men and women of all creeds or nations or races who fell victim to the fascist and communist belief in Inexorable Laws of Historical Destiny.”16 Popper was referring to Oswald Spengler's influence on National Socialism (Nazism) in Germany, Marx's influence on the Bolshevik Revolution in Russia, and Hegel's influence, via Benedetto Croce and Giovanni Gentile, on Italian Fascism (it should be noted, however, that while Gentile was a self-avowed “philosopher of fascism,” Spengler and Croce overcame initial enthusiasm to become severe critics of the fascist regimes in their respective countries). Though Popper ranked history rather low in the hierarchy of intellectual endeavors, he nevertheless pined after “old-fashioned history,” which, precisely by being conformist, carried none of the politico-ethical risks engendered by metahistory.
Howene 1inla42,m nemana! artid c by Carl Gustem Hempel, “Thn Function of General Laws in History,” reinvigorated the debate around the viability of philosophy of history in Anglo-American, and more specifically Analytic, thought. Hempel's intervention in historical studies must be seen against the backdrop of his endeavor to unify the natural and the “human” sciences: Naturwissenschaft and Geisteswissenschaft (literally “sciences of spirit”) as they were known in Germany since Hegel. Their strict separation had been an
Choosing the Past: Hayden White and the Philosophy of History
7
article of faith for the anti-positivists, in particular Wilhelm Dilthey and Max Weber; but under the aegis of a logical-empirical model of explanation, the “covering law model” (i.e. a law that explains or “covers” the relation between two or more discrete events),17 Hempel effectively circumscribed philosophy of history according to a more austere, formal concept of explanation (“explanation sketches”) that did not permit prediction (what Arthur Danto dubbed “historical foreknowledge”),18 as had the speculative form of philosophy of history.19
Arthur Danlo later differentiated between “substantive” ann “analytical” approaches to philosophy of history, the latter being “philosophy applied to the special conceptual problems which arise out of the practice of history as well as out of substantive philosophy of history.”20 Danto claimed that “substantive” philosophy of history was much closer to history than to philosophy, thereby replacing the distinction between history and metahistory with a distinction between analytic philosophy of history, on the one side, and history/specu-lative philosophy of history (metahistory), on the other. Thus, according to this view, analytical philosophy of history is the only true philosophy of history. Nevertheless, one could certainly characterize the approach Danto was advocating as “metahistorical” in the strict sense of this term. In fact, White, though an admirer of Danto, would later reject Danto's opposition: his Metahistory would be both an epistemological critique of historical practice and a philosophy of history in its own right.
A eew yeaes after H“mpers ^““^1 aasay, a compeving vision within Anglo-American philosophy of history emerged in R. G. Collingwood's The Idea of History, posthumously published in 1946 and popularized by W. H. Dray.21 Whereas Hempel had advocated methodological unity in the sciences, Collingwood promoted Dilthey's and Weber's Verstehen (understanding) model of the human sciences, as contrasted with the Erklaren model (objective scientific explanation) then in vogue, thereby preserving the separation between Geisteswissenschaft and Naturwissenschaft. Collingwood held that history involved understanding the thought processes of historical actors rather than explaining events according to causal laws. History was thus a product of interpretation, and it required the exercise of one's imagination. (The section of Collingwood's book entitled “The Historical Imagination” may have inspired the subtitle for White's Metahistory: The Historical Imagination in NineteenthCentury Europe.) While Collingwood rejected the scientization of history, he was not anti-scientific, and he cast a long shadow over Anglo-American philosophy of history, in such figures as W H. Walsh, Patrick Gardiner, W B.
8
Philosophy of History After Hayden White
Gallie, and Alan Donagan.22 Collingwood was also an early influence on White. One of White's first essays (1957) was entitled “Collingwood and Toynbee: Transitions in English Historical Thought.”2-' White saw Collingwood as a “crack in the armor of a historiographical tradition that ha[d], heretofore, avoided all connections with Continental historicism and philosophy of history”24—a “crack” that White himself would continue to widen in the ensuing years.
A third watershed pevelopment in the Anglo-Americau altilwhe toward philosophy of history, Thomas Kuhn's The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (1962), with its theory of “paradigm shifts,” belatedly delivered the death-blow to Hempel's logical-empirical approach to historical explanation. Kuhn showed that science was in fact subject to the same kind of interpretative framing it had criticized in the “sciences of spirit” (Geisteswissenschaft). This book thus effectively obliged analytic philosophers to choose between a “softer” historical approach or a “harder” philosophy of science approach. Not surprisingly, they chose the latter, though a few renegades, such as Richard Rorty, extolled Kuhn as a welcome corrective to a philosophy of science gone awry.25 Thus, after a lively, twenty-year debate, analytic philosophers abruptly lost interest in the philosophy of history. Danto's Analytical Philosophy of History (1965) turned out to be the last major intervention in the field. In a 1995 essay entitled “The Decline and Fall of the Analytic Philosophy of History,” Danto wistfully observes:
I can ah-nk of very little in philosophy of history from the middle-1960s to the present. [...] There is hardly room in the present scene of philosophy for discussion of its issues. To find someone actively working [in the philosophy of history] would be almost. like encountering Japanese soldiers on some obscure atoll who never found out that the war had ended.26
On the Continent, however, due to the popularity of Marxism, the grand tradition of philosophy of history had remained a potent force, even if it was often subordinated to broader philosophical concerns. The new philosophical schools of phenomenology and existentialism, particularly in such exponents as Martin Heidegger (in Being and Time, 1927) and Jean-Paul Sartre (in Nausea, 1938, and Being and Nothingness, 1943), saw the concept of history (or “historicity”) as integral to their ontological investigations, to their redefinitions of what it means to “exist” in the world, even as they contested the conceits of academic historicism. In 1960, Sartre published a full-scale theory of history in his massive Critique of Dialectical Reason, which fused Marxist categories with existentialism.
Choosing the Past: Hayden White and the Philosophy of History
9
In th9 1960s, with influence of Nietzsche largely displacing that of Marx, particularly in France, a more avant-gardist eoneeption of philosophy of history took hold. Michel Foucault's Les mots et les choses: Une archeologie des sciences humaines (translated as The Order of Things: An Archeology of the Human Sciences), published in 1966, exemplified this new spirit, helping to launch the “poststructuralist” revolution in French thought. However, like Kuhn's magnum opus (with which it shared some common elements—Foucault's epistemes are the loose equivalent of Kuhn's “paradigm shifts”), Les mots et les choses was not generally regarded as a contribution to the philosophy of history genre, which already seemed outdated despite the appearance of Sartre's Critique (or perhaps even because of it...). No doubt this was due to the fact that Foucault's and Kuhn's were successful philosophies of history; they were, in White's phrase quoted above, “socially innovative historical vision.”27
Andinl w79, wfth thepoiSstructuralist moveme fu inftin swing^era-Fran^ois Lyotard published a brief but famous tract, The Postmodern Condition, in which he both defines and denigrates philosophy of history as “grand narratives” that no longer function in a “postmodern” condition. However, Lyotard's work was in effect a philosophy of history that proclaimed the end of philosophy of history, the metanarrative of the end of metanarrative.28
Choosing the past: Existentialist philosophy of history
The same year as Foucault's Les mots et les choses an obscure professor of medieval history at the University of Rochester publishes an article that would soon become a kind of clarion call for a revolution in historical studies. This article, “The Burden of History” (1966), which appeared in the recently founded journal History and Theory, established Hayden White as a fiery polemicist who quixotically challenged the basic conventions of his field. Though White's piece generally avoided discussing philosophy of history per se, focusing instead on the present state of academic historiography, the goal of the essay was nevertheless to show how the “antihistorical attitude” or “the revolt against historical consciousness” that characterized much early twentieth-century writing amounted, in effect, to a positive philosophy of history.
Sartos lnflueofe wrs pafticulerln id n^ic^^ce.29 The section of Being and Nothingness entitled “My Past” was no doubt the prime inspiration for what would become one of the defining ideas of White's work, that of “choosing one's past.” Sartre's philosophy revolves around a fundamental dialectic between
10
Philosophy of History After Hayden White
“being-for-itself” (human consciousness or transcendence) and “being-in-itself” (objectness or facticity, all that is not consciousness). Sartre holds that because we are never reducible to our facticity (which includes our past), we are always essentially and inescapably “free,” free to choose ourselves, but also obliged to choose ourselves in every moment; for even to refuse to choose is still a “choice,” and thus passivity is an illusion. (In Sartre's sense, “to choose” does not necessarily entail the ability to obtain, but only the autonomy of choice. As Sartre says, “success is not important to freedom.”)30 Hence existence is a kind of burden (we are responsible for it); just as White will argue in his essay that history is a “burden” in this onto-existential sense. The desire to flee our ontological responsibility is what Sartre calls “bad faith” (self-deception): it involves either refusing our facticity (ignoring our limitations) or refusing our transcendence (relinquishing freedom). In historical terms, one could call the first type revisionism, the denial of facts, and the second type conservatism, the denial of choice or responsibility. White treats mostly the second type in his essay; the first type will be addressed in his later work, as he comes under attack for his putative “relativism.”31
In thc section on the persona] pnsl, Sartre outlines severalpositions That will find their way into White's thought. Using the French Revolution as a historical example, Sartre distinguishes between historical fact (“the Bastille was taken in 1789”),32 which is immutable, and historical meaning (“a revolt without consequence. or... the first manifestation of popular strength”),33 which is a function of the choices made by later interpreters. Historical actors and historians thus choose or decide to see two events as related or unrelated according to their volitional aims and factical predispositions. To return to Sartre's example, the revolutionary Convention, “anxious to create a famous past of itself,” sought to transform the taking of the Bastille into “a glorious deed” (though from another perspective the same event could easily be seen as desultory)—a designation it has retained in the form of the fete nationale, Bastille Day. (Since the royalist perspective was extinguished and no longer holds sway, there is no genuine alternate history in French national consciousness; but in principle, of course, there could have been.) Through such rituals, one could say that modern France effectively chooses itself, constantly, as the embodiment of the ideals of the French Revolution and, in so doing, projects a certain future. The reverse is also true: by projecting these ideals as its most desirable future, modern France effectively chooses the French Revolution as its past (the past is has chosen to fulfill or actualize), rather than, say, the Restoration or the Napoleonic Empire. In the same way, one could say that modern Germany refuses its Nazi past as its
Choosing the Past: Hayden White and the Philosophy of History
11
past, as the past whose spirit it wishes to embody and perpetuate, but it does not thereby deny the facticity of Nazism or the Holocaust, which would be a form of bad faith, i.e. revisionism or negationism.34 In Sartre's formulation, transcending one's past does not at all involve its denial.
This operation is bestillustrated by what Sartre saus aboiilthe personal past and the existential “project”:
Now the meaning of the pass is rSrscSly dependant on my present project. [...] I alone in fact can decide al each moment she bearing of she pass. I do not decide il by debasing over it, and in each instance evaluating she importance of Shis or ShaS prior event; buS by projecling myself toward my ends, I preserve She pass wish me, and by action I decide its meaning. Who shall decide whether She mystic crisis in my fifteenth year “was” a pure accident of puberty or, on She contrary, She first sign of a future conversion? I myself, according So whether I shall decide—at twenty years of age, at thirty years—to be converted.35
Sartre's point here—a point first illustrated in his novel Nausea—is that the past is meaningless in itself; it only takes on meaning when it is volitionally related to the present, that is, to present choices, which, for Sartre, entail a choice of being (according to Sartre, we are defined by our actions, not by a preexisting “essence”; existence precedes essence). Sartre in effect collapses the distinction between an internal (subjective) and an external (objective) perspective in historical studies (i.e. Verstehen versus Erklaren), for the historian is in the same predicament as the historical actor; both are effectively making history in both the literal and figurative sense.36 Sartre notes that “the historian is himself historical; that is. he historicizes himself by illuminating ‘history' in the light of his projects and of those of his society.”37 In other words, whether under the guise of “professionalism” or of “objectivity,” the historian cannot escape the fundamental freedom that inheres in every individual's and society's relation to the past and the ends towards which the individual or collective projects itself as a function of its project. The irreducible element of futurity in choice is another factor in the blurring of the distinction between history and philosophy of history: all history is essentially a projection into the future through the past, even if only philosophy of history does so explicitly (i.e. in good faith).38
•Sllotmarizing Sartres view Th “'Hie Burden os I Thiory,” White writo: “we choose our past in the same way we choose our future. The historical past therefore, is, like our various personal pasts, at best a myth, justifying our gamble on a specific future, and at worst a lie, a retrospective rationalization of what we have become through our choices.”39 White will effectively adopt
12
Philosophy of History After Hayden White
this existentialist view, transforming it into a full-blown philosophy of history. Indeed, the idea that “we choose our past in the same way we choose our future,” that we realize our present aspirations by projecting them backward as well as forward, would become a guiding thread in White's work. By suggesting that his fellow historians considered the past as pure facticity, White was essentially accusing them of “bad faith” in the Sartrean sense. The bad faith historian refuses to see his activity as part of a living project; he sees the past as past, as irremediably over and done with; nevertheless, the past is still conceived as a “burden” in the sense that it weighs on the present as having determined it facti-cally.40 White thus advocated the “transformation” of historical studies, so “as to allow the historian to participate positively in the liberation of the present from the burden of history”41 By this, White meant that instead of regarding our past as simply a chain of linear causes that lead inexorably to the present, we should instead conceive of our past as a vast storehouse of possibilities from which we are obliged to choose, even if not every possibility is realizable in the present (due to our factical limitations).
In an essay velivered at afonferenceinl967, “What is a Historical System?,” which should be considered a sort of companion piece to “The Burden of History,” White fleshed out this idea of choosing the past, offering concrete examples a la Sartre to illustrate his point. Proposing that history be considered on the analogy of a biological organism (i.e. as coming into being, maturing, and dying), White was able to collapse the distinction between historians and historical actors, thereby mirroring Sartre's dissolution of the difference between the historical and the personal past. The ostensible aim of the essay was to show that “historical systems differ from biological systems by their capacity to act as if they could choose their own ancestors.”42 That is, biological systems are genetic, whereas historical systems are genetic in only a fictional sense, since these involve not actual (or merely) physical generation, but ideal relationships: “the historical past is plastic in a way that the genetic past is not. Men range over it and select from it models of comportment for structuring their movement into the future. They choose a set of ideal ancestors that they treat as genetic progenitors”43 As an example, White cites the development of medieval Christian civilization, culminating in the Holy Roman Empire: the break with pagan-Roman culture occurred when men decided to consider themselves as being the descendents of the Judeo-Christian part of their past, effectively abandoning the Roman worldview and cultural practices, and thereby becoming wholly “Christian”: “when in short they began to honor the Christian past as the most desirable of a future uniquely their own, and ceased
Choosing the Past: Hayden White and the Philosophy of History
13
to honor the Roman past as their past, the Roman sociocultural system ceased to exist.”44 Though White does not mention it in this essay, his idea of the historical system stems from his early fascination with Martin Luther's revolt against the Catholic Church, which replaced an almost millennium-and-a-half tradition with a return to textual Christianity and the simplicity of origins. Protestants thus do not regard Catholics as their progenitors, but instead see themselves as coinheritors of the original Christianity of the Gospels and of the ministry of Peter and Paul in the first century a.d.
Atthe en d of the essay, While sumsup hisargumentin terms that recall the Sartrean language of “The Burden of History”: “In choosing our past, we choose a present; and vice versa. We use the one to justify the other. By constructing our present, we assert our freedom; by seeking retroactive justification for it in our past, we silently strip ourselves of the freedom that has allowed us to become what we are.”45 It was traditional historical inquiry that White saw as “stripping [us] of our freedom,” since, in its bad faith, it refused to see its justification of the present as the result of a choice of (historical) being.
Al diis point U think o would Oc lu.^^1 pfit to ^^11 the shhce.lehions os this problematic in Martin Heidegger's Being and Time—a strong influence on Sartre—which will allow us to better elucidate the stakes involved in the idea of “choosing the past” from the perspective of existentialist philosophy.46 In Division II of Being and Time, Heidegger uses the Kierkegaard-inspired concept of “repetition” or “retrieve” (Wiederholung) to describe the constitutive historicity of Da-sein (human existence):
Retrieve is explicit handing down, ryar is, going back to the pehhsbsUtieh of Da-sein ryar has been thoro. The authentic retrieve of a pehhsbsUry of existence ryar has been—the pehhsbsUry ryar Da-sein may cyeehe its owe yereeh—is existentially grounded in anticipatory teh<>lstenehh... The retrieve of what is pehhsbre nesryer brings back “what is pahr,” nor does it bind the “prehenr” back to what is “eurearee.” [...] Rather retrieve responds to the pehhsbsUry of existence ryar hah-been-rhere. [...] Retrieve neither abandons sthelf' to the pas:, nor does it aim at progress.47
The essentials of Heidegger's existential conception of history are contained in this passage: 1) the idea that Da-sein can “choose its own heroes,” that is, it can choose its own models from the past as possibilities for the present (White echoes this idea in a previously quoted passage: “Men range over [the historical past] and select from it models of comportment”); 2) the idea of the repetition/retrieve (Wiederholung) of a past conceived as that which “has
14
Philosophy of History After Hayden White
been” (Gewesenheit)—that is, a past that retains its relation to the present—as opposed to the “outdated” (i.e. objectified) past (Vergangenheit) severed from the present; 3) repetition/retrieve is also a response to the past; in other words, it is the manifestation of an interpretative attitude, which is not a desire to relive the past, to merely identify with past actors (retrieve/repetition does not “abandon itself to the past”), but to make it new, open-endedly, that is, without thereby assuming a particular teleology (such as progress or decline). This, for Heidegger, constitutes an authentic relation to one's past.48
In his esfayfortVis volu me, Gianni Vattimooffe rsc lucid reinlerpretalion of Heidegger's concept of authentic historicity:
There is no history of Being other than that of human praxis; and there is no objective structure other than that of history considered as previous, that is, as interpreted for and by the present, a history that, as Being and Time teaches, is never vergangen (gone) but always only gewesen (what has been). That is, the past is not an immutable datum... but a call, a message that always addresses itself to the projectural capacity of the one who receives it and who actively interprets it. What is “real” is not in any way objective Being, but only that which has been produced by other beings existing before us, themselves active interpreters, involved in a process that might have developed difierently.
n attimo contrasts the notion of the past as objective Being with the past conceived as praxis (a move that leads nattimo in a recent book to link Heidegger to Marx),49 thereby recalling Heidegger's cardinal distinction (elaborated in Division I of Being and Time) between Vorhandenheit (“presence-at-hand” or “objective presence”) and Zuhandenheit (“readiness-to-hand” or “handiness”). On this conception, the past is primarily Zuhandenheit, a practical past, a past always already interpreted in the context of its relationality to the present and the future, and only secondarily or derivatively Vorhandenheit, the objective apprehension of the past, i.e. the past of the traditional, Rankean historian (whose ideology, for Heidegger, would entail an impoverished vision of the past, because of its detachment from being-in-the-world).
In his most recew: w< irl; 1201 0), Whita hao shugOt do davetpp o similar distinction, that between the “practical past” and the “historical past,” a distinction he derives from the British philosopher and political theorist Michael Oakeshott.52 The concept of the “historical past” matches up with Heidegger's critique of scientific objectivity, of the primacy accorded to “theory” as a mental activity that detaches objects from their practical contexts, considering them in isolation and for their own sake, existing by and for themselves. White writes:
Choosing the Past: Hayden White and the Philosophy of History
15
The historical past is a theoretically motivated construction, existing only in the books and articles published by professional historians; it is constructed as an end in itself, possesses little or no value for understanding or explaining the present, and provides no guidelines for acting in the present or foreseeing the future.51
In short, the “historical past” has no edifying purpose, even if it has a scholarly one. However, White's notion of the “practical past,” unlike Heidegger's concept of practical utility, stems from a more Kantian conception of the “practical,” with its ethico-political implications (without losing sight, of course, of the Nietzschean-Sartrean conception of the past as not something to be merely studied, categorized, examined, etc., but rather as something to be used for distinctively human ends): “The practical past is made up of all those memories, illusions, bits of vagrant information, attitudes and values which the individual or the group summons up as best they can to justify, dignify, excuse, alibi, or make a case for actions to be taken in the prosecution of a life project.”52 Here again we find the existentialist language of the “project,” thereby connecting White's current thinking with the impulses that came out of the writing of “The Burden of History” and “What is a Historical System?” in the mid-1960s.
ot sNurprisingly, White associates the “practical past” with the philosophy of history, thus underscoring the fact that for White all authentic history is philosophy of history, that is, “socially innovative historical vision.” Aligning philosophy of history with literary genres such as the historical and realist novel, which also bear a “practical” relation to the past, White observes:
It has to be said that, whatever else it may be, philosophy of history belongs to the class of disciplines meant to bring order and reason to a “practical past” rather than to that “historical past” constructed by professional historians for the edification of their peers in their various fields of study.53
Now the idea of the “practical past” is certainly not a new thought in White's work, even if it does effectively bring philosophy of history back into the forefront of White's reflections, after having languished for some time in the background.54 In fact, the idea of the practical-historical is rooted in White's earliest university studies, in the example of his undergraduate mentor William J. Bossenbrook at Wayne State University, an inspiring figure who also taught two other contributors to the present volume, Arthur Danto and Harry Harootunian. Describing the intellectually formative (and not merely inspirational) influence of his teacher, White recounts:
16
Philosophy of History After Hayden White
[Bossenbrook] consistently sustained the illusion that the study of history was the most important intellectual task that a morally responsible man could undertake. Perhaps this was because he always portrayed the great historians of the past as actors in the dramas of culture, not as mere passive commentators on events that had already run their courses. [...] We concluded that thought and action were not mutually exclusive alternatives, but only different aspects of the single seamless web of human involvement.55
This passage, written in 1968, before any of the books for which he is now famous had been published, offers what I consider to be the best succinct statement of White's philosophy of history: historical writing as praxis—as the shaping both of historical reality and of the community that historical writing serves. White's insistence on the activity of the heroic historian/philosopher of history, versus the passivity of the traditional, objectivist historian is simply a somewhat romanticized version of a leitmotif that runs throughout his oeuvre. (In his essay for this volume, “History as Fulfillment,” White criticizes the idea of historians as “the passive receivers and forwarders of [historical] messages”) For White's philosophy of history is inextricable from a philosophy of life: that is, from an understanding of the role of history in individual and collective selfmaking and self-transcendence.56
White's philosophy of history and the “linguistic turn”
One has to keep in mind that White wrote “The Burden of History” during a transitional moment in twentieth-century intellectual history: a few years after Thomas Kuhn's seminal text appeared but a few years before the poststructuralist explosion with which White, rightly or wrongly, would come to be identified. Thus White's examples of avant-garde, anti-historicist French thought in that essay are Sartre and Camus rather than Foucault and Derrida. Nevertheless, “The Burden of History” was anthologized in the popular textbook collection Critical Theory Since 1965, published in 1986, in effect canonizing White as one of the progenitors of the “theory” movement in literary and cultural studies, which, in the mid to late 1980s, had hit its high-water mark (though it has survived in various forms up to the present day).57
A new phase in the rec ept ionof White’s thought was opened hp with the publication of Metahistory: The Historical Imagination in Nineteenth-Century Europe in 1973, which is still White's best-known and most controversial work.58 From the perspective of the philosophy of history, to which Metahistory was
Choosing the Past: Hayden White and the Philosophy of History
17
immediately seen as a seminal, if provocative, contribution, the work appeared to have more in common with the classic representatives of the Anglo-American tradition, especially with Collingwood and Dawson, and with Croce (to whom a chapter was devoted), than with the poststructuralist revolution then underway in France.59 Nonetheless, in retrospect, Metahistory is considered the chief exponent in historical studies of what was then being called the “linguistic turn,” a term popularized by Richard Rorty's watershed 1967 anthology, The Linguistic Turn, which documented the surge in interest among analytic philosophers in the philosophy of language. In fact, one of the great accomplishments of Metahistory was its reconfiguration and repackaging of philosophy of history in a form that appeared to coincide with current concerns. White sought to demonstrate, on the one hand, that philosophy of history could not be separated from contemporary investigations into language, narrative, and culture, and, on the other, that these investigations often adopted a methodologically and epistemologically naive view of history, removed as they were from the decades-long debate about philosophy of history (which now seemed impossibly obscure and abstruse). White's novel use of tropology and later on narrative theory to describe historical processes thus allowed him to insert himself into the multifarious debates that raged in the late 1960s and 1970s around the proper relationship between the “two cultures” of the humanities and the sciences—an updated and linguistically centered version of the earlier Naturwissenschaft/Geisteswissenschaft dichotomy.60
Atleast init ially, the ph“ase“linguistic ”urn"wasused todescribe what looked to be a parallel Copernican Revolution in Anglo-American and Continental thought: coalescing around the later Wittgenstein and J. L. Austin, in the case of the former; and, in the case of the latter, around the later Heidegger and Ferdinand de Saussure. Indeed, for both styles of thought, the “turn” signaled the adoption of a highly self-conscious attitude toward language as the basis for the possibility (or impossibility) of any concept of truth or reality. Heidegger's dictum, “language is the house of being,” and Wittgenstein's aphorism “philosophy is a battle against the bewitchment of our intelligence by means of our language”61 encapsulated this new perspective.62
White Whfte dgreed wfth ehe ^enera] aimb of the“iinuuisite thmr’lic sejects such an appellation for his own work, preferring instead to call it a “discursive turn.” As he remarks in a recent interview: “what [I] do is treat these disciplines as discourses which create their own oblect of study by processes that we recognize as being grounded in language, but as being more rhetorical than, say, grammatical, in their articulation or elaboration.”63 It is thus around the
18
Philosophy of History After Hayden White
notion of discourse, with its more humanist, practico-ethical implications, that White organizes his philosophy of history, rather than around language per se (which can also be non-human), or grammar (form or structure), even if, as Levi-Straussian structuralism or Chomskean linguistics demonstrated, such investigations could yield powerful results. The discipline that takes discourse as its object of study is rhetoric, and it was on the basis of rhetorical theory— the theory of figures or tropes (the counterpoint to logic)—that White's new philosophy of history was conceived. This is not to say that White did not find or seek out parallels between his resurrection of rhetoric (also influenced by the rhetorical theorist Kenneth Burke)64 and the investigations emerging out nexus between Heideggarian phenomenology and Saussurean semiotics, which he often sought to co-opt for his own purposes (his 1973 essay “Foucault Decoded: Notes from Underground” is a case in point). But his Metahistory was not indebted to this current.65 White's more immediate methodological influences were Northrop Frye's notion of archetypes in literary history (as elaborated in his Anatomy of Criticism), Erich Auerbach's historicization of the concept of realistic representation (as expounded in Mimesis), and Vico's philological and tropological approach to cultural history (in his Scienza nuova).
Metahistory is a multifaceted book that endeavors to address several related aims simultaneously, from a historical account of the evolution of historical consciousness in the nineteenth century to a tropological account of the deep structure of historical thought. Though it is most famous for the Vico-inspired, fourfold theory of tropes (Metaphor, Metonymy, Synecdoche, Irony) developed in an extensive introduction, Metahistory is also, and perhaps foremost, a sustained defense of the philosophy of history genre. On the one hand, it infused new life into philosophy of history by making it amenable to the new, linguistically oriented approaches in the humanities; on the other, it deconstructed the cardinal opposition between straight history and philosophy of history that had resulted in the excommunication of the latter from academic historiography. The first goal was achieved by the performative nature of Metahistory itself: Metahistory demonstrated that a tropological philosophy of history was possible by its very elaboration. In this sense it less important to learn that, as White writes, “Marx apprehended the historical field in the Metonymical mode,”66 which in itself is not very illuminating, than the fact that this kind of reflection is incorporable into a tropological system that defines historical consciousness as such.67
The second go! involved showing that thetropes structured all historical discourse and thus that, at the deepest or most fundamental level, straight
Choosing the Past: Hayden White and the Philosophy of History
19
history and philosophy of history are one (“the possible modes of historiography are the same as the possible modes of speculative philosophy of history”).68 But, of course, only a metahistorical approach can account for this fact, thereby surreptitiously establishing its priority. White's Metahistory was in effect a meta-metahistory,69 since it involved the condition of possibility of (historical and philosophical-historical) discourse itself, even if this condition was conceived as tropological rather than as logical-conceptual.70 (White's move was not unlike Jacques Derrida's deconstruction of the opposition between speech and writing: both terms of the opposition are shown to inhere in a common structure, a structure that can only be described by one of the terms, “writing” or “arche-writing,” though Derrida's “arche-” sounded paradoxically more transcendental than White's “meta-.”) As Harry Harootunian observes in his contribution to this volume, White “[laid] to rest the claims of the philosophy of history by shifting its ground to linguistic protocols that would demonstrate how ‘empirical history' was no more exempt from the mediations of linguistic prefiguration than was philosophy of history.”
IInis, in his preface to Metahistory, White argues that the differences between straight history and philosophy of history are more superficial than essential, that “there can be no ‘proper history' which is not at the same time ‘philosophy of history,'”71 meaning that, in addition to the common tropological structure, all history writing inevitably embodies theoretical presuppositions that concern history-in-general and that condition any elaboration of the historical particulars. Proper or straight history is philosophy of history that does not recognize itself as such (because of its unconscious conformity to prevailing norms); philosophy of history, on the other hand, “contain[s] within it the elements of a proper history,” choosing rather to emphasize the “conceptual construct” over the historical data.72 lus, from the perspective of each of the opposing poles, straight history is criticized for its insufficiency of meaning and philosophy of history for its excess of meaning. However, for White, the idea that Marx apprehended historical reality Metonymically and that Ranke apprehended historical reality Synecdochically was a more important distinction than that between the philosophy of history embodied by the former and the straight history exemplified by the latter.
ougIh White's tropological grid appeared at first glance to be rigid and deterministic, it was actually meant as a corollary to Sartre's dictum that we are “condemned to be free.” For once we see the tropological apprehension of historical reality as constituted by a choice (among different tropological apprehensions) that we are condemned to make (“condemned” because we cannot
20
Philosophy of History After Hayden White
think discursively and thus historically outside of the tropes), we can then unburden ourselves from the idea of corresponding to a non-linguistic reality, from the illusion of representing historical reality “as it really was.” White writes that “we are indentured to a choice among contending interpretative strategies in any effort to reflect on history-in-general; [...] the best grounds for choosing one perspective on history rather than another are ultimately aesthetic or moral rather than epistemological.”73 The “we are indentured to a choice” is clearly a paraphrase of Sartre's “we are condemned to be free.” However, White's superimposition of the moral and the aesthetic dimensions that inform and ultimately constitute any “choice of interpretative strategy” already transcends the Sartrean problematic (at least insofar as it was developed in Being and Nothingness)7
As the reader of Metahistory knows, the tropes are aligned with modes of emplotment (Romantic, Tragic, Comic, Satirical), argument (Formist, Mechanistic, Organicist, Contextualist), and ideological implication (Anarchist, Radical, Conservative, Liberal). The choice of tropological apprehension, then, cannot be motivated by purely epistemological or empirical reasons, but is rather a function of the historian's or philosopher's ethical and aesthetic predilections. This skeletal structure of the tropes is fleshed out, as it were, by the other modes, which are subject to a virtually inexhaustible number of combinatory possibilities; these constitute for White a “historiographical style.” e oOf nthe most important and enduring of White's ideas put forward in Metahistory is the aesthetic concept of “emplotment,” a term of his coinage. Though it sounds as if it were hatched by a literary theorist, the term is in fact designed to reveal something that is specific to historiography (for it would be a redundant concept in literary theory). By “emplotment,” White meant that the historian and the philosopher of history use conventional (i.e. preexisting and culturally conditioned) narrative forms to organize and tell a story about the past—or, to put it more succinctly, stories are made, not found. Traditional historiography, on the other hand, had always held that the story is to be discovered or uncovered in the amassed data, that the facts tell their own story. But this view, if carried to its logical conclusion, presupposes that there are an infinite number of possible stories, none of which bear any formalizable (i.e. plot) resemblance to any other. White holds that this is an illusion, that it is impossible to construct (or, if you like, reconstruct) a narrative, whether composed of real or imagined elements, utterly bereft of conventional form (plot type) or of “storiness” itself (i.e. as having, as Aristotle said, a beginning, a middle, and an end). In other words, there is no such thing as narrativein-general, only particular kinds of stories, which White reduces, following
Choosing the Past: Hayden White and the Philosophy of History
21
Northrop Frye, to the four archetypes mentioned above: Romance, Tragedy, Comedy, Satire.
Thus to say that lite historian orphilosopher emplots the story that he/she wants to tell about the past is not to say that he/she selects the kind of story that he/she thinks best fits the facts, but rather to say that the choice of narrative form is a way of “choosing the past”; in other words, there are a multiplicity of ways of emplotting the same elements, none of which, formally speaking, can be said to correspond better to “historical reality” than any other, since historical reality itself is an effect of such a discursive choice. This idea was quite revolutionary, since historians generally believed that, even if they used novelistic techniques to make their accounts more (aesthetically) effective or (epistemologically) convincing, these were on the order of mere form rather than content, which, they believed, remained untainted by such “embellishments.” As White observes in his essay for this volume (Chapter 1):
The form of the historian’s discourse (its form as a story) was conceived to be contingent and detachable from its contents (information and argument) without significant conceptual or informational loss. And this on two possible grounds: either the story told in the discourse was a mimetic image of a concatenation of events which, once established as facts, could be shown to have actually manifested the same form as the story told about it; or, the story told about the events was simply an instrument or medium of communication used by the historian to convey information about an uncanny subject-matter to a lay audience deemed incapable of comprehending it in its historiologically processed form.
White thus contends that there is a “content of the form,” as one of his later collections (1987) was titled, that the aesthetic form inevitably conveys a moral, conceptual, and ideological content, forming a totality with the putative “content,” with which it is in the end indistinguishable.
e raThpprochement White effected between historical and fictional narrative on the level of form was, unsurprisingly, considered a threat to the quasi-scientific objectivity that historians saw as legitimating their discipline as the search for the truth of the past. The idea that every narrative contains an inexpugnable element of fiction (the very conventionality of form that preexists and conditions any narrative process) appeared to strip history of its status as an empirical, fact-driven discipline.75 If “all stories are fictions,” as White liked to say, then how could the historian effectively separate his activity from that of the novelist? And if fictionality (which, for White, is simply another name for figuration) is fundamental to historicity, then how are we to conceive of
22
Philosophy of History After Hayden White
“historical reality,” the concept of which supposedly differentiated modern historical inquiry from mythical thought?76
Whites response indolved arguing, following /Xi^rerbachs demonstration in Mimesis, that “realism” historical or otherwise, is an aesthetic and thus a contingent concept, that the realistic representation of historical reality is subject to the same vicissitudes of meaning and conventionality as the literary or artistic concept of realism. There is one concept of realism, however, that White thinks conditions all others, and this is figural realism, the title White gave to his 1999 collection of essays.77 In Metahistory, however, White had spoken about figuration in terms of “prefiguring the historical field”; that is, the figures/tropes set out the basic modes of apprehending historical reality, the representation of which (the historical account) was the fulfillment of the figure/trope that structured it. This conception of “prefiguration” was compositional; that is, it is what accounted for the historian’s construction of the historical referent, which, as was stated above, only exists as an effect of discourse. But no “prefiguration” is inherently more “realistic” than any other.
InWhitosiatfs worl<, howeym, he wiHiisethe concepto^'■pluTlo'Lnati<so as projectional; that is, it involved seeing the prefiguration-fulfillment relation as a function of a temporally realized project. (Karyn Ball, in her essay for this volume, explores the various meanings and role of prefiguration in White’s thought.) White comes to view the very act of narration (in addition to the choice of narrative mode) as a means of “choosing the past,” thus uniting White’s earlier existentialist view of historical meaning with his later, specifically narrativist and Auerbach-influenced approach (see White’s essay for this volume, “History as Fulfillment”). This idea, elaborated in his article “Auerbach’s Literary History: Figural Causation and Modernist Historicism” (and collected in Figural Realism), takes as its starting point Auerbach’s literary-historical reinterpretation of the Christian concept of figura (on which Auerbach had written an eponymous essay in 1939), which White saw as the unacknowledged methodological principle behind Auerbach’s Mimesis.78
e coThncept of figura derives from the Christian hermeneutic tradition. A postulate of Biblical exegesis, it involved seeing one event in light of another, one event as prefiguring another, from the perspective of the later event. It thus differed from prophecy, which projects forward. Figural interpretation, also called “typology” (the relation between “type” and its fulfillment in the “antitype”), projects backward, treating earlier events as if they had been destined to be fulfilled in later ones. This type of interpretation had the advantage of preserving the reality or literalness of events that might otherwise be taken as
Choosing the Past: Hayden White and the Philosophy of History
23
merely allegorical or symbolic. Figural interpretation was thus a prototype of realistic historiography, of a way of generating specifically historical meaning.79 In the Christian context, however, there was an assumed teleology to this interpretative process: the earlier event was thought to actually cause or be intrinsically connected to the later event (often occurring centuries later) as part of a divine plan. Christian figural interpretation was thus, in theory, a way of understanding or perceiving God's project, even if, in practice, it was a very human project of selfactualization that was being performed; for Christian typology, inevitably and in effect, involved choosing the past. White called this aesthetic and secularized analog to the Christian figura “figural causation.” One can thus perceive how the Christianfigura could become the prototype of the existentialist concept of historicity outlined above. As White writes in his essay for this volume:
Plot-meaning is a way of construing historical processes in the mode of a fulfillment of a fate or a destiny considered, not as an instance of mechanical or teleological causality, but as contingent on the interplay of free will (choice, motives, intentions), on the one hand, and historically specific limits imposed upon the exercise of this free will, on the other.
In more explicitly Sartrean terms, then, plot-meaning is a combination of facticity (“historically specific limits”) and transcendence (“free will”). White thus narrativizes the existentialist/Christian-figural concept of projection: the generation of narrative meaning (emplotment) is simply a function of the prefiguration-fulfillment dynamic, codified in such literary devices as “foreshadowing,” “denouement,” “formal patterning,” “flashback,” etc.
rhe prstspecificallyphilosophital articul ation of the dynamicor figuralism is no doubt Soren Kierkegaard's concept of repetition. In his eponymous book, Kierkegaard writes that “the dialectic of repetition is easy, for that which is repeated has been—otherwise it could not be repeated—but the very fact that is has been makes the repetition into something new.”80 In a key, but little-discussed essay on Northrop Frye, White observes that Kierkegaard's concept of
repetition—“not the simple repeating of an experience, but the recreating of it which redeems or awakens it to life”—names the process productive of the type/antitype relationship by which a later event, text, period, culture, thought, or action can be said to have “fulfilled” an earlier one. [...] “Fulfillment” here is to be understood as the product or effect of a kind of reverse causation—a kind of causation peculiar to historical reality, culture, and human consciousness, by which a thing of the past is at once grasped by consciousness, brought into the present by recollection, and redeemed, made new.81
24
Philosophy of History After Hayden White
Figural causation is thus a kind of “reverse causation”; and in this sense, all history, like the Sartrean “project,” is an act of redemption: one redeems the past by choosing it, by choosing to actualize it in and for the present, thereby making it “new,” or making it anew.
The diffifulty for the mo hern historian in eountenancing suchan idea of “reverse causation” is succinctly addressed by Gabrielle Spiegel in her essay for this volume, where she observes that White is
secularizing typological nhtehns of the relationship between figures and events separated by centuries in a way that, I suspect, few contemporary historians would understand or accept. For the notion of “fulfillment” suggests that an earlier event/person/type in some (perhaps only “figural”) sense causes its much later, distanced realization, hence bypassing immediate local contexts as principles of explanation.
However, it is not so much that White's figuralism “bypasses” immediate or local contexts, but that it superimposes itself on them as their condition of possibility. Certainly, White privileges narrative explanation over mechanical or ehcient-causal explanation in historical accounts. (And “causality” is, of course, itself a highly contested term in philosophy.) He argues that narrativization (to which even non-narrative history must ultimately succumb) underlies the creation of any specifically historical meaning, even if the examination of “antecedent causes” provides useful information for the construction of historical narratives. hiteWdoes not deny that the examination of nexuses of ehcient-causal relations can offer insights into how or why something happened the way it did, just as one would naturally take into account such relations in the investigation of the causes of a car crash or the results of an election. But to “explain” a car crash in purely causal-physicalistic terms (as one entity of a certain shape and size, making contact with another at a certain velocity, a certain angle, and in certain weather conditions, etc.) does little to “explain” such an event in terms of the human factor involved, even if a strictly objective description is considered adequate for the physical or exact sciences. lus no one “explains” the results of an election by saying that one candidate got more votes than another, or by describing the voting technology, even if these are valid causal explanations. Insight into human events demands understanding, imagination, and ultimately interpretation, and, for White, interpretation is nothing but figuration. To “explain” a car crash or an election is to say what it means; such explanation is thus indissociable from the act of interpretation, with all that the term “act” entails (i.e. the moral, the volitional, the practical). Putatively “empirical”
Choosing the Past: Hayden White and the Philosophy of History
25
descriptions tend to suppress, deemphasize, or even eliminate the role of the will in meaning making or interpretation. They proclaim their objectivity under the self-deceptive (and perhaps even self-serving) guise of passivity. As White observes at the end of his introduction to Tropics of Discourse, ours is “an age which has lost its belief in the will and represses its sense of the moral implications of the mode of rationality that it favors. But the moral implications of the human sciences will never be perceived until the faculty of the will is reinstated in theory.”82
Philosophy of history after Hayden White
I turn now to a brief discussion of the essays that comprise this volume. The first chapter features a previously unpublished essay by White. Originally given as a keynote address, “History as Fulfillment” is an excellent introduction to White's later thought as well as one of the few essays in which White explicitly defines how his notion of figuralism relates to historical studies, a topic that White had addressed in the article on Auerbach cited above. Unlike the latter essay, however, White here develops the notion that narrative itself—“plot-meaning”—is a manifestation of the prefiguration-fulfillment dynamic, thereby connecting his earlier philosophy of history with his later thought (a unity I have sought to describe in this introduction according to the idea of “choosing the past”). “Emplotment” the key-term of White's Metahistory, can therefore be seen as a kind of figuralism. In addition, White reiterates that, despite structuralist and pseudo-scientific attempts to reduce history to its conceptual content, narrative is essential to history, not merely as a discourse genre, but as a discipline: “history, anthropology, and psychoanalysis are, I believe, the only disciplines of the human sciences that still treat narrativization as a legitimate means of explanation, rather than as an instrument of vulgarization by which to introduce findings to a lay audience.” This is because, when it comes to human events, such as those that history recounts, “the figure precedes the concept, rather than the reverse.” It would not be an exaggeration to say that the working out of this deceptively simple idea is the guiding thread of White's philosophy of history.83
F IS. Anhi^mil’s essay, “A Plea for a Cognitivist Approach to 'White’s Tropology,” treats the question of how White's theory of tropes can represent a “contribution to historical rationality” Ankersmit thus diverts White's tropology from its original purpose in Metahistory (which was to examine historical discourse in terms of the structuring effects of the most basic tropes), thereby
26
Philosophy of History After Hayden White
developing White's thought in ways that are suggested by but not explicitly elaborated in Metahistory.84 Specifically, Ankersmit seeks to address how the referential or truth value of historical writing can be assessed according to the logic of tropes. Ankersmit notes that since White's main purpose was to show how historical meaning was generated, White gives scant attention to the truth value of the tropes. Given that the tropes are, by nature, negations of literal truth, and that historical texts do not, of course, present themselves as negations of literal truth, but, on the contrary, as facts strung together in some coherent form, the question arises as to what happens to this literal truth—i.e. its cognitive status—as the structuring and ordering function of the tropes take over, as it must in any discursive rendering of historical reality. Therefore, Ankersmit seeks to establish which tropes best capture the cognitive relation between historical discourse and historical reality. In his tour through the four tropes, Ankersmit begins by eliminating Irony and Metonymy from contention: the first because it transcends or frustrates any cognitivist account; the second because the “trope itself remains outside of any effort to make sense of the world.” He concludes that only Synecdoche and Metaphor can constitute a specifically cognitive relation to historical reality or historical truth—a finding that will demonstrate, according to Ankersmit, “how Whitean tropology may shed some new light on the cognitivist aspects of historical writing.”
In her es“ay “Del ive r Us from A-IIisloricism: Metahistory for Non-Histori”ns," Mieke Bal also tackles the question of truth in historical scholarship, but from a very different perspective. She describes her first encounter with White's Metahistory as a seminal moment in her own intellectual formation, for it offered a way out of the rigid formalism-historicism binary that characterized the critical discussions of that time. Those in the formalist camp (like Bal) were invariably accused of ahistoricism, of refusing to acknowledge the relevance of historical meaning. White's philosophy of history, however, had demonstrated how all history, philosophical or straight, is inevitably structured and hence subject to formalist analysis. But Metahistory also showed that formalism, far from being ahistorical, is firmly rooted in time, specifically in the way in which the present frames the past. Bal observes that “by endorsing the present as a historical moment in the act of interpretation itself, one can make much more of the object under scrutiny.” Bal notes how her notion of non-linear history, which she calls “preposterous history” (“the impact the present has on the past”), can be considered in a similar light as White's figuralism (i.e. as reverse causation), except that she separates her account from any suggestion of redemption. In the second part of her essay, Bal takes White's work to an area where it is not
Choosing the Past: Hayden White and the Philosophy of History
27
often applied (Stephen Banns work being an important exception), that is, to visual art. Bal analyses at length a slide instillation by Belgian artist Ana Torfs entitled Du Mentir-Faux (Concerning Lying-Falsehood), which purports to thematize questions of historical truth and reality by analogizing the photographic image of a contemporary woman with the historical figure of Joan of Arc. Unlike most of White's interpreters, Bal does not see White's philosophy of history as undermining the idea of historical truth, but rather as recasting it beyond the fact-fiction, true-false dichotomies—an operation she sees embodied in Torfs's installation. According to Bal, by “explicitly bracketing the question of truth,” White “leaves it and the desirability of its pursuit intact.”
Karyn Ball’s es“ay, “Haydeh White’s Hope, orthe Pol itics ofPrefiguration,” seeks to reconcile the seeming transcendentalism of White's philosophy of history, i.e. the “precritical” function of tropic prefiguration, with “his commitment to recapturing the potential for visionary politics forsaken by a disenchanted historical profession.” In her investigation into White's transcendentalism, Ball invokes Kant's distinction between the transcendent (that which is beyond experience) and the transcendental (necessary condition of experience), to show how the objectivist historian, by treating historical reality as existing apart from historical discourse, falls prey to what Kant calls the “transcendental illusion”: the confusion of a noumenal idea of history, what history is in itself, with objective reality and knowledge. This Kantian distinction allows Ball to “shed light on White's ‘transcendental narrativism' as an ‘aestheticist' approach to the critique of historiography.” Ball's resulting rapprochement between the aesthetic and the political dimensions in White is a welcome corrective to commentaries that miss the inherently political nature of White's formalist-aestheticist approach to philosophy of history, or the aesthetic nature of White's politics. In this vein, Ball notes how White's association (in his essay “The Politics of Historical Interpretation”) of the aesthetic category of the sublime with a visionary philosophy of history “amplifies what is at stake in his politics of interpretation: a potentially mobilizing recognition of the negativity of history—its dynamic withdrawal from the totalizing presumptions of the understanding.”
An menaioyeh eh ove, ArShan I') an Io hao. abo been inspires! by ihc teaphing of William J. Bossenbrook at Wayne State University. He thus begins his essay, “Hayden White and Me: Two Systems of Philosophy of History,” with a tribute to Bossenbrook, whom he credits with having taught his students “to think grandly about history,” but also with stressing the importance of narrative in historiography, something that became central to both hanto's and White's
28
Philosophy of History After Hayden White
philosophies of history. Though they hailed from a common source, their ideas diverged considerably. Danto notes that whereas White, in Metahistory, was interested in the “rhetoric of narration,” Danto's Analytical Philosophy of History was concerned with the “logic of narration” that is, with narration as “explanatory schemata” even if both opposed efforts to scientize history. In Danto's case, it was a matter of redefining philosophy of history in the wake of Logical Positivism. Contesting both Hempel's system as well as the Verstehen tradition stemming from Collingwood, Danto focused on what he called “narrative sentences” an idea first laid out in an eponymous 1962 essay.85 Danto holds that historical discourse is based on sentences that “refer to at least two time-separated events though they only describe (are only about) the earliest event to which they refer”86 This logic of narration (expressed in such sentences as “Petrarch opened the Renaissance”) implies a historian's perspective, since the event is recounted in the light of unforeseeable later events; past agents are by definition not capable of conceiving such sentences. For Danto, this means that “to live in history” is to live “in the light of futures cognitively inaccessible to us”—an idea that is also, though in a different way than Danto intends, consistent with White's idea of figuralism, a point that White clarifies in his “Comment” at the end of this volume. (In his essay for this volume, Richard Vann describes just such a rapprochement, commenting that “since historians know most outcomes of historical actions, as do many of their readers, a certain amount of foreshadowing is unavoidable. It is intrinsic to the ‘narrative sentence' described by Arthur Danto as particular to historical narrative” And, as Vann further observes, foreshadowing is nothing but figuralism.) antDo's idea of what it means to “live in history” corresponds roughly to White's distinction between the “historical past” and the “practical past.” As White writes:
Nobody ever actually lived or experienced the historical past because it could not have been apprehended on the basis of whatever it was that past agents knew, thought, or imagined about their world during their present. Historians, viewing the past from the subsequent vantage point of a future state of affairs, can claim a knowledge about the past present that no past agent in that present could ever have possessed.87
In his essay, Danto thus unwittingly reveals more commonalities than divergences between his and White's philosophies of history. Both see historical understanding as an irreducible fusion between past and present against the illusion of a fixed and autonomous past.88
Choosing the Past: Hayden White and the Philosophy of History
29
n otAher alumnus of Bossenbrook's classes, Harry Harootunian, treats in his essay, “Uneven Temporalities/Untimely Pasts: Hayden White and the Question of Temporal Form,” the notion of mixed temporalities—the idea that time is a cultural construct whose inherent heterogeneity is restrained and suppressed by the dominant historical narrative, which, in the modern era, is invariably an amalgam of nationalism and capitalism.89 By separating philosophy from history, as Rankean empirical historiography had advocated, the problem of time and its cultural specificity was safely banished to the realm of abstract philosophizing, with which academic historiography need not concern itself. According to Harootunian, the nationalist-capitalist vision of history, which emerged concomitantly with the establishment of history as a discipline, sought to master the confluence of disparate temporal regimes (e.g. memory, lived time, labor time), in the formation of a national identity. This move combined the ideology of linear unfolding (the progressive realization of a selflegitimating totality) with a static or neutral temporality (history as completed in the present) that crowds out other possibilities. In more Whitean terms, Harootunian is criticizing the subsumption of practical pasts, here considered as embodying diverse temporal forms, within a historical past that enforces temporal uniformity and conceptual standardization. Harootunian sees White's “privileging of the present,” which is “both the scene of the historical itself” and “the place of production of its critique,” as the crucial point de départ for any ethically responsible philosophical approach to history. For, as Harootunian observes, “the present is always the place where the specters of difference materialize with the threat of untimely unpredictability, to confront and threaten the stable boundaries on which any contemporary historical identity is founded.” To illustrate his point, Harootunian explores three twentieth-century works that narrativize and thematize forms of temporal resistance to capitalist time (i.e. to a time that is linear, functionalist, uniform, totalizing, etc.): Jacques Rancière's La Nuit des prolétaires, Peter Weiss's The Aesthetics of Resistance, and the Japanese “worker's circles” of the 1950s, as recounted in the journal Gendai shiso. Finally, Harootunian finds in White's use of Bakhtin's “chronotope” (in a 1987 essay entitled “The ‘Nineteenth Century' as Chronotope”) to deconstruct the conventional concept of a historical period a viable and effective alternative to the nationalist-capitalist metanarrative and its homogenization of time.
ansH Kellner, a student of White's at the University of Rochester in the 1960s, weaves his reminiscences of White's classes with a focus on White's concept of figuralism. His contribution, “Hopeful Monsters or, The Unfulfilled Figure
30
Philosophy of History After Hayden White
in Hayden White's Conceptual System,” observes how figuralism, though not explicitly deployed in Metahistory, nevertheless informed White's developing understanding of historical narrative: “White moves from tropes to figures to figuration via narrative” Kellner introduces the term “backshadowing” into White's concept of figuralism, to show how its misuse can sometimes lead to condemnations of past actors for failing to anticipate a future that now appears inevitable. Kellner writes that such a use “presume [s] that the truth of the fulfillment was evident in its figure at the time of the figure.” Kellner concludes that “what we take to be great events may turn out to be forgotten; the thing that was not noticed may assume a great meaning.” The former is what Kellner terms the “unfulfilled figure”: the unrealized potential of an event whose fulfillment is infinitely deferred. The unfulfilled figure can also be conceived as an absolute refusal of meaning, as the noumenal reality of the thing-in-itself, presentable only via the negative presentation of the sublime (in the Kantian-Lyotardian sense). Thus, to use an example Kellner cites earlier in his essay: to think of the Holocaust as an unfulfilled figure is to see it in terms of an inadequacy of discursive forms that could ever “fulfill” its meaning and conduce to a “normal” historical apprehension, i.e. to one that redeems the past. This reflection is particularly a propos when one takes into account what White has to say, in his essay for this volume (Chapter 1), about the redemptive element of figuralism and the controversial Historikersteit (Historian's Debate) in Germany.90 brieGllae Spiegel's contribution, “Rhetorical Theory/Theoretical Rhetoric: Some Ambiguities in the Reception of Hayden White's Work,” explores the various and often contradictory ways in which White's thought has been interpreted, which she sees as due in large measure to the rhetorical and sometimes ambiguous formulations that White employs to articulate his ideas. Spiegel views White's earlier work as equivocating between a general rhetorical or semiotic theory and one that specifically applied to historiography. For there is nothing in White's tropology that limits it to history per se, and yet White's seeming refusal to embrace his theory's generality opens him up to the critique that his thought is not adequately elaborated. Further, White's flirtation or fascination with structuralism and poststructuralism, critical movements with which he alternately seemed to align himself and keep at arm's length, made it difficult to discern if he was positioning himself as a Nietzschean avant-gardist or a more “responsible,” Kantian type of thinker. Specifically, Spiegel wonders if White's tropological theory of historical writing is conventional (i.e. contingent, subject to cultural determination) or structural (i.e. necessary, like a Kantian condition of possibility), since it often appears as if it could fit either
Choosing the Past: Hayden White and the Philosophy of History
31
mold. As an example, Spiegel discusses White's intervention in the area of Holocaust studies (“Historical Emplotment and the Problem of Truth,” 1992), which came at a time when the special historical status of this event emerged as a defining issue in historical studies. While she views White's firm stance against the dream of a “wholly literal, non-aestheticized account of the event” as consistent with his long-held positions, she is less certain of White's advocacy of modernist modes and of the middle voice in particular to avoid “unseemly aestheticization.” She sees White's effort to soothe his critics as a “retreat from the most basic positions that he had earlier set forth about the nature of historical representation.” With regard to the concept of “prefiguration,” Spiegel observes the wide gulf that separates the use of this term in Metahistory, where it had a “precritical” function, from its role in White's later thought on figuralism, where it concerns the temporal dislocation of meaning. (I attempted to clear up this ambiguity above, by distinguishing between “compositional” and “projectional” conceptions of prefiguration.) Evincing skepticism about White's “aesthetic” reappropriation of figuralism and typology, Spiegel contends that White's commitment to a kind of “figural causality,” however qualified, “displaces ‘prefiguration' from a mode of linguistic and literary activity on the part of the historian to one inherent in the course of history itself,” thereby raising the specter of an ontological realism that White has always sternly rejected.
In “HandenWhiteand Non-non-Histories,” RichardVann exploresan area that has not received much attention from historians or historical theorists: experimental history writing. Vann takes as his point of departure White's essay “The Modernist Event,” which he sees as having been prescient in anticipating the advent of history that, as Vann quotes White, flouts “the taboo against mixing fact with fiction except in manifestly imaginative discourse.” Of course, as Vann notes, White has throughout his career argued that there is an inherently fictional element in historiography, all while maintaining the difference between real and imagined events. However, as White contends in “The Modernist Event,” the seeming disappearance of the event in the media age (the age of the “simulacra,” as Jean Baudrillard put it) has led to a dissolution of the dichotomy between real and imagined events. Indeed, what White, in a recent lecture, called “non-non-histories” represents a much more radical form of experimentation than what had previously been viewed as acceptable or even possible. Vann first considers quasi-experimental historical works, those that both use and deviate from the conventions of historians, but, since these are written by novelists, are invariably classified as “novels.” Vann's examples of novelized true stories include Truman Capote's In Cold Blood, Norman Mailer's
32
Philosophy of History After Hayden White
The Executioner’s Song, and Thomas Keneally's Schindler’s Ark, all of which inhabit the ambiguous space between history and fiction. In the second part of his essay, Vann examines truly experimental works of historical writing: those of the medieval social historian John Hatcher, whose account of the Black Death uses fictional characters “to provide a framework for the facts,” as Hatcher himself claims; and of Keith Hopkins, a social and demographic historian of ancient Rome, whose A World Full of Gods: The Strange Triumph of Christianity (2001) purports to be academic history, though it features time-travellers and an imagined “confession” of Saint Augustine. Vann concludes that these are “hybrid” works, presenting themselves as both historical (a contribution to historical scholarship) and fictional (with invented characters and events), without being reducible to either pole (unlike, say, the historical novel, which is first and foremost a novel). These hybrid works serve a singular critical function, according to Vann, since “thoroughly fictionalized historiography can also complicate the notion of historical knowledge that is presupposed by uncritical acceptance of the fiction/non-fiction binary.” Vann concludes his essay by observing that such a complication of historical knowledge has in fact been White's unquestioned legacy.
Finally,Gianni Vatti mo ,in his essay“From tbeProb Em of Evil to Hermc neutic Philosophy of History,” shows how White's critique of the objectivist credo of traditional empirical historiography, which presupposes a stable and immutable historical reality, can be considered in light of Heidegger's cardinal idea of the “ontological difference,” that is, Heidegger's critique of metaphysics as the confusion of beings (objective being, scientific realism) with Being (the self-revelation of what is)—for in both cases it is a matter of a “hermeneutic philosophy of history” transcending a narrow-minded and socially oppressive objectivism.91 Vattimo begins his essay by noting how Heidegger's ontological difference or the “destructuring of the ontological tradition” (i.e. of the history of ontology)92 is a “direct consequence of the traditional reflection on the problem of the ‘reality' of Evil.” That is, how can Evil, traditionally understood as non-being, exist? This polemic is transformed, in Heidegger's thought, into a new ontological thesis: “‘a being that exists does not exist,' but happens.” In this formula, Vattimo implicitly collapses the theory of historicity articulated in Heidegger's Being and Time (which I analyzed above) into Heidegger's later idea of Being as happening or “event” (Ereignis). Vattimo thus proposes a “radical reading of Heidegger,” which translates into a “radical historicism,” that is, a historicism that results from an “ontology of the present” and from its triple function of “inheriting-interpreting-transforming.” As we have seen,
Choosing the Past: Hayden White and the Philosophy of History
33
this is essentially White's conception of figuralism: for the historical figura at once inherits, transforms, and interprets the past by choosing it in the present. Thus Vattimo's contention that “the past is not an immutable datum... but a call, a message that always addresses itself to the projectural capacity [capacita progettuale] of the one who receives it and who actively interprets it” is certainly redolent of White's figural hermeneutics, and particularly of its existentialist dimension in the language of the “project.” In this vein, Vattimo concludes that “rethinking the work of Hayden White today in the light of these considerations opens onto a meaning that is not merely commemorative or celebratory”; that is, White's work still has a “clearly polemical importance” in resisting the return to scientific realism, or to a “new [philosophical] realism” that harks back to essences and linguistic determinism.
***
It is now—and perhaps abundantly—clear that the one theme that runs through virtually all of the essays in this volume is that of figuralism. Moreover, one could say that all of the essays contained in Philosophy of History After Hayden White represent, in their own eclectic ways, fulfillments of White's oeuvre, fulfillments that will, in turn, serve as figures for new interpretations. If all great thought is measured by its capacity to create new meanings, White's philosophy of history is certainly no exception.