7
Hopeful Monsters or, The Unfulfilled Figure in Hayden White's Conceptual System
Hans Kellner
To study the career of Hayden White is to study a series of concepts. His work is not primarily a sequence of monographs about one period, or one thinker, or one problem. It is, rather, driven by the force of the conceptual proposals he has offered. The first major proposal was that we consider the formal and ideological structures of historical texts from a standpoint that was based, at bottom, on the organizational force of rhetorical tropes in the construction of a coherent account of the past. Certainly, White's desire to see things from a higher point of view, his tactic of moving up to a higher level of abstraction to grasp and better characterize a complex field of phenomena, found its first major expression in the tropes. Operating at a higher level than the field of historical discourse they were meant to clarify, the tropes could serve other discursive forms as well, and White was not reluctant to extend his ideas to narrative in general, by focusing on the level of narrative discourse where the tropological strategies came into play. And so, in time, the language of the tropes virtually disappeared from White's work, to be replaced by a discussion of emplotment. No longer simply a way of categorizing plot-forms, such as the forms he had found in the work of Northrop Frye, emplotment became an ideological device of narrative, always forcing coherence (even by giving form to incoherence) on the events it presents. In this sense, emplotment, with its suppression of any sense of sublime chaos in history, is far from being a neutral medium for the representation of human events; it is rather, as White recognized, the ideological content of narrative form and the fulfillment of the promise provided by the tropes as narrative structures.
From the study of emplotment, White moved on to the mechanism by which emplotment, and narrative discourse in general, produced meaning and
152
Philosophy of History After Hayden White
overcame non-meaning. This happens by way of a special form of explanation, a form that was neither genetic, nor logical, nor physical, but rather uniquely humanistic. It is called figuralism. Figuralism, as White describes it, is a special form of explanation, in which a later event calls forth and names an earlier one, which is then deemed to have somehow “caused” the later phenomenon. This is how emplotment functions: the conclusion of the narrative establishes and fixes the plot of the work, as romance, comedy, or whatever, and that emplotted outcome will not only establish the meaning of the whole, but will also assign to each of the parts of the story its significance as a figure to be fulfilled by a later event. These core concepts of the figural basis of emplotted narrativity have guided White's work.
White begins as a young medievalist who quickly allied himself with older colleagues in publishing projects—appealing in the publishing world of the 1960s, when history was an important academic major—that took him into much wider areas than the medieval Church, his academic beginning.1 In 1966, with the encouragement of friends—Louis Mink and Richard Vann—White expressed the professional discontents of some of his generation in “The Burden of History,” and then proceeded to locate the source of the problem in the nineteenth century.2 Metahistory was one result of this. On the one hand, it is a historical sketch (and no more) of how a Golden Age of romantic freedom and individualism gave way to the professional and ideological world of discipline; but, intertwined with this story-sketch is another Metahistory, a sprawling, ambitious, rather messy book, fascinating and questionable in all its parts. The method presented was cobbled together from available sources and made to look systematic; but the most apparently rigorous part, identified as the “deep structure,” became the flashpoint, the offensive member for those who felt that they were under attack—in Greek, no less—by the “theory” of tropes.
It was the tropes that turned White's story away from disciplinary history, slowly, by presenting a tool so general (or deep, if you prefer) that it could be used as a historiographic index (as in Metahistory), or a kind of intellectual history (as in White's essays on Darwin, Croce, and Foucault, among others),3 or as an account of almost anything else that has a discursive form (including the description of a fountain in Proust).4 Derrida's famous “il n'y a pas de hors-texte” (there is no outside to the text) is another way of saying “il n'y a pas de hors-trope.” It need not have been the case that Metahistory and tropes became synonymous; this was a case of the reception creating, to some extent, the book. Or rather, books, since Metahistory contains a number
Hopeful Monsters or, The Unfulfilled Figure
153
of different books, each attracting a different set of allies and opponents.5 Unquestionably, the interest was in the tropes, and they were extrinsic to “normal” history. The essays of Tropics of Discourse demonstrated the uses and disadvantages of tropes. They were a splendid premise for examining many texts and thinkers; but a theory that can do anything will sooner or later become tiresome. Tropes had become “foregrounded,” as the formalists say. Once recognized, they can be discounted.6 White's subsequent turn to narrative proposed another “deep structure”—narrativity—as the content of the form of narratives; as a content, narrative made its own, often overlooked, demands. Above all, narrativity demanded that the story make sense, that it have a coherence and a meaning, which was fine for imaginary stories that somehow expressed the order and meaning of an authorial mind, but which added an ideological dimension to stories that purported to reflect real events, events that have meaning only if this is intended by a divine author or supplied by a less-than-divine narrator.
Peter Brooks has noted the sudden decline of interest in poetics in the 1980s, when a turn to historical and ideological angles replaced the dictums of Northrop Frye and Jonathan Culler.7 Instead of the vision of a basis of understanding how discourse works, a serious poetics of forms and structures that deferred any urge to evaluation, we got a wholesale rush to judgment. The rise of Michel Foucault marks this turn, and I think it is characteristic of White that his early treatments of Foucault—a decoding, as he put it—made the Frenchman into an orthodox tropologist.8 White remained faithful to poetics, as indicated by his comments on the New Historicism, charging that they failed to succeed at either poetics or history.9
Metahistory had said nothing about narrativity and not much, really, about narrative, and the essays that derived from the tropes in Tropics of Discourse did not either. On the other hand, The Content of the Form, collecting White's thoughts on narrative, is basically trope-free. If the figures of speech are absent, however, the figuration that underlies them and projects them into temporality is emerging. White moves from tropes to figures to figuration via narrative. Because White, like Aristotle, elected to place emplotment at the heart of narrative, the emergence of figura, in the sense that Erich Auerbach had traced this term from antiquity and had awarded its apotheosis in Dante, was natural.10 The title of White's subsequent collection of essays, Figural Realism, reminds us that there is no direct encounter with the real, which might in brief be taken as the whole of White's teaching. It also reminds us that all three of White's major theoretical devices—the theory of tropes, the content of narrativity, and the
154
Philosophy of History After Hayden White
figure/fulfillment process—are all enormously abstract structures, offering a view that is potentially meta-everything.
There has always been something scandalous about Hayden White, something that brought forth excess hostility. The cause seems to lie in the “system.” Like Gorgias the Sophist, White has treated the serious with wit, and the comic with seriousness. For four decades, I can attest, graduate students were warned against the “sophism” of White's way of thought. White has reordered the five canons of rhetoric, elevating style above invention, and treating “evidence” with almost as little attention as Quintilian or Aristotle, for whom evidence seems to define what is brought forth using torture. White had been interested in other things, and those other things led, again and again, to the aesthetic. Like Walter Pater, Hayden White has attended to the forms of things; the subjects are incidental. If you simply substitute “history” for poem and picture in the following passage from Pater, White's aesthetics will emerge:
That the mere matter of a poem [history], for instance—its subject, its given incidents or situation; that the mere matter of a picture [history]—the actual circumstances of an event, the actual topography of a landscape—should be nothing without the form, the spirit, of the handling; that this form, this mode of handling, should become an end in itself, should penetrate every part of the matter: this is what all art constantly strives after, and achieves in different degrees.11
Given this attention to “the mode of handling,” otherwise known as “the content of the form,” it is no surprise that White's eye ranges from topic to topic. “Hum a few bars,” and White will fake it, usually convincingly, because the “given incidents or situation”—to repeat Pater's words—are occasions for the deployment of his formal system.
This system was first deployed in	Metahistory, at which point it was schematically based on categories—the remarkable quadruple tetrad drawn from Vico, Frye, Stephen C. Pepper, and Karl Mannheim. One might also include Erich Auerbach, if only for the technique of using quotations as the guide to the discourse. At this point, structuralism meant Claude Lévi-Strauss, Roman Jakobson, and, interestingly, an unnamed Noam Chomsky. From Chomsky, White derives the expression “deep structures,” which designates the role of the Vichian tropes in the system. (As a later version of the system will put it, the “deep structure” is the figure that is fulfilled in the surface expressions, or, as Pater might have put it, “the spirit of the handling” penetrates the “mere matter of a picture.”) Of course, the wired-in, Cartesian aspects of Chomskian
Hopeful Monsters or, The Unfulfilled Figure
155
linguistics never had a place in the system. For White, the “deep structures” were never so deep as to be more than “conventions.” Jakobson had provided a general sense of how figures of speech (metaphor and metonymy) could be inflated into cognitive models (similarity and contiguity), but White always adapted what he needed, which was usually a broadly linguistic vocabulary, particularly a description of the levels of language.
But, since there would be no way of arbitrating among the different modes of explanation that might be chosen by a given historian (Organicism, Contextualism, Mechanism, Formism) on the one hand, or the different modes of emplotment he might use to structure his narrative (Romance, Comedy, Tragedy, Satire) on the other, the field of historiography would appear to be rich and creative precisely in the degree to which it generated many different possible accounts of the same set of events and many different ways of figuring their multiple meanings. At the same time, historiography would derive whatever integrity it was supposed to have from its resistance to any impulse either to move to the level of outright conceptualization of the historical field, as the philosophy of history was inclined to do, or to fall into apprehension of chaos, as the chronicler did.12
Insofar as there was a problem here, it lies in the consequences. White remarked, citing the “aged Kant” at the end of Metahistory, that histories should be judged on “moral and aesthetic” grounds, but the balance between them is hard to find. In his lectures on Kant's third Critique, Jean-François Lyotard writes: “the Idea of freedom leads not to moral action but to aesthetic feeling.”13 And aesthetic feeling is always a little scandalous, particularly among historians and in a time that has turned away from formal poetics.
White has had little use for psychology in his work; he seems to share the disdain for psychoanalysis displayed by Sartre and Foucault. His treatment of Freud is as a tropologist and follows Émile Benveniste in its general direction. And so we read in Metahistory White's explanation of why a set of four personality types are missing. In the first place, he says, “present-day” psychology is as anarchic as history was in the nineteenth century, and therefore liable to show the same interpretive forms that Metahistory found in historical discourse. The second point is more important. Psychoanalysis is meant for neurotics and psychotics, those who are by definition unable “to sublimate successfully” their dominant obsessions. The geniuses discussed in Metahistory, however, have demonstrated by their very accomplishments their “sublimative capability.”14 This suggests that these people are to be defined not by who they
156
Philosophy of History After Hayden White
are, as psycho-genetically determined by Oedipal forces or by other business, but rather by what they did. In producing their texts, they showed a sense of freedom that White links with sublimation, but not quite in the Freudian sense. White means that they acted as if they were free to choose their fates and the family that they would conceive as their intellectual progenitors. All the psycho-historical probing imaginable would be inadequate to change Marx's or Tocqueville's ability to escape the mold of the doctrinaire, who acts within an inescapable set of obsessions, but they have done this themselves by acts of will. h iteW's choice of the word “sublimation” in Metahistory is clearly a figure of the later de-sublimation that marked the turn-of-the-nineteenth-century professionalization (and thus ironization, in the bad sense) of historical discourse. The freedom that sublimation brought for the Golden Age was an aesthetic freedom, but it figured forth a Utopianism that sparked the imagination in a way that the de-sublimated, professionalized history of the later nineteenth century could not; and White is always an advocate for Utopianism. It is in the life of the mind that real changes occur, because only there do we have that measure of freedom that humanity is accorded. White's treatment of Marx, like his treatment of Freud and Foucault, is to choose him as an ancestor, but only insofar as he can show strong family resemblances to White himself. So Marx becomes a dialectical tropologist, even as he derides Utopias and seeks laws of history.15 odeMrnism is a kind of fulfillment rather than a reaction to earlier realisms.
It is a further elaboration of nineteenth-century history, which now appears as a figure beginning to be fulfilled: “It is not history that is being rejected but the nineteenth-century form of it.”16 Hayden White's relationship with the nineteenth century in Europe is complex. In general, he splits it into the good nineteenth century and the bad nineteenth century. The good nineteenth century is the early decades that saw the escape from Enlightenment historical irony and the flowering of a garden of remarkably individualistic historical visions. The bad nineteenth century begot the historical profession as we know it, returning to an ironic stance, but in a worse form than had obtained in the eighteenth century. It is an irony of “value-free” objectivism, not of the detached aesthetic observer analyzed by Lionel Gossman.17 Gossman describes a situation in which the factuality of history was taken to be problematic, leaving the contemplative eighteenth-century observer free to reflect ironically on the meaning of this questionable record. In this, Gossman asserts, “historical narrative and fictional narrative were constructed in fundamentally similar ways.”18 Freedom was the product of this ironic detachment. At the end of the next century, as described by White, the irony was, on the contrary, that of the
Hopeful Monsters or, The Unfulfilled Figure
157
newly professional historian, whose contemplation was detached because of the purportedly “value free” methodology that formed the basis of his calling, thus eliminating his status as a free and interested party. It was, notes White, the outsiders to professional historiography who produced the speculative response to the irony of the profession. And it is at this point in Metahistory that White, famously, notes that the only reasons for preferring one form over another “are moral or aesthetic ones.”19 e  suThperiority of the Golden Age historians, if we code them according to White's system in Metahistory, is that they operate powerfully at the most creative levels of language, the lexical and the semantic. In other words, they felt free to create a new historical vocabulary, with new players, processes, and functions, while, at the same time, they were able to project these lexical terms into larger worlds of meaning that imaged a future of their dreams, often a Utopian dream. We recall here the epigraph to Metahistory, from Bachelard: “One can study only what one has first dreamed about.” If I may quote myself:
The epigraph of Metahistory, from Bachelard, stresses the importance of dreaming to any kind of conceptualization. We must be free to dream, White implies; this may be the only freedom we can hope for. And dreaming of a different future, a future which is not emplotted in advance by the narrative power of “realities,” must involve an enthusiasm for replotting the past in the interest of other realities. Insofar as a certain sort of historicizing has served to foreclose the openness of the past to redescriptions, reemplotments, representations of another kind, White resists.20
The lexical and semantic levels seem to be the avatars of poetry, its prefigurations. Prose, on the other hand, is the fulfillment of grammar and syntax, the middle levels of language, where the basic terms and ultimate meanings are deployed, but rarely questioned. And the later nineteenth century, in giving birth to the social sciences, renounced the dreams of the Golden Age and its creative, sometimes Utopian, visions of humanity in time, replacing this with narratives that aspired to re-presenting the past as it was, while marginalizing versions of the past—those that might lead to a new direction or choice of ancestry—as “philosophy of history,” a very different thing indeed. This is what White told us in Metahistory.
r onIy is the enemy throughout Metahistory. It was found in the debilitating skepticism that the Enlightenment bequeathed to the Romantics, who had the task of overcoming it, in White's view, but again and again “fall” back into it. The professionalization of history as a value-free sort of activity with truth as its
158
Philosophy of History After Hayden White
goal was the return of the repressed irony. In the eighteenth century, the man of letters could look upon the past from a detached philosophical viewpoint, as did David Hume or Edward Gibbon. A century later, the historian would try to be equally detached, but the detachment came from a methodological stance based on the exclusion of fundamental aspects that were either too basic or too grand.
But the way out of irony is through irony itself. If we can envision human experience as a semantic field in which irony is only one of the possible plausible (that is, “epistemologically responsible”) ways of figuring the story, then we have a dialectical view that liberates us from indenture to any one vision. By way of this higher ironic attitude, we leave irony behind as bondage, and enter a new world of ironic freedom. We have only to will this to prove that “the aged Kant was right, in short; we are free to conceive ‘history' as we please, just as we are free to make of it what we will.”21 Thus, we have an escape from eighteenth-century irony, via Hegel and the dialectic, followed by a fall into nineteenth-century irony, defined as the historicist straitjacket that rendered illegitimate any fundamentally critical view of the past. And this was followed by a new freedom made possible by a crisis:
The “crisis of historicism” into which historical thinking entered during the last decades of the nineteenth century was, then, little more than the perception of the impossibility of choosing, on adequate theoretical grounds, among the different ways of viewing history which these alternative interpretive strategies sanctioned.22
Another, related, strike against the nineteenth century was its neutering (White speaks of feminization) of art as a significant cognitive authority, by suppressing rhetoric in the interests of a masculinized discourse. Aestheticism and utilitarianism marginalize both art and rhetoric, which might otherwise have offered genuine insights into the nature of power relations in society and shown the other elements of the trivium, grammar and logic, to be tropic alternatives within a fully articulated human community.23 Rhetoric claims to know the secret to both the poetic and the practical; namely, that they are essentially one, a figural product through and through.24 Rhetoric is the mediator, as dialectic had been earlier.
But there is yet another suppression to be blamed on the nineteenth century, namely, the suppression of the historical sublime, presented as the apprehension of the meaninglessness of history. For “Ranke and his epigones,” whatever problems might be encountered in historical reflection are to be attributed to “surface phenomen[a],” gaps in the evidence, errors in archival maintenance,
Hopeful Monsters or, The Unfulfilled Figure
159
or basic human absent-mindedness—in other words, precisely the mistakes in the grammar and syntax of historical processing that White's “system” had found to be part of the bad nineteenth century.25 The overall fault of this nineteenth century was its insistence upon finding meaning in things, or rather, its resistance to meaninglessness. For it is meaninglessness that White believes will push us toward the freedom that is there for the taking. The impediment to our proper sense of meaninglessness is narrative; as Roland Barthes notoriously commented, language is fascist, not because it prevents us from speaking, but, on the contrary, because it forces us to do so. So it is with narrative, White maintains, which will control us via emplotment to such an extent that even a work purposely bereft of plot becomes a fully emplotted statement of the plotless—for example, Jacob Burckhardt. What White is calling for is what Barthes announced in his 1968 essay “The Death of the Author”—the victory of the reader over the author.26 Like the “text” for Barthes, history may be seen as a vast Utopian space, where no code, no trope, no plot can claim interpretive preeminence.
The danger, for White, is not meaninglessness, but meaning, because it is everywhere, invisible, embedded in everything. The “middle voice” that Barthes, Derrida, Heidegger, and White found intriguing, not as a grammatical device, but as a functional recasting of subjectivity, seemed appealing precisely because it threw a monkey wrench into the situation of agency that underlay meaning. Barthes may have seen the demise of the middle voice as the start of modernity, and it may well resemble what Derrida had in mind with his notion of différance; but White, in proposing it as a proper mode of representing the Holocaust and other “modernist events,” cannot resist bringing up the nineteenth century again. Cultural modernism is a reaction to the nineteenth century's goal of describing reality realistically, “where reality is understood to mean ‘history' and realistically means the treatment not only of the past but also of the present as ‘history.' ”27 And this, the present as history, I take to mean full of meaning, emplotment, constrained. Above all, it is part of a narrative. It is Barthes again who remarks that the world is drowning in narratives, that they are “numberless,” and that narrative is “international, transhistorical, transcultural, narrative is there, like life.”28 This is the present as history, a world always already told. But Barthes dreams of a world that would be “exempt from meaning,” not in order to imagine a pre-meaning (reality itself), but rather to imagine a post-meaning, where he imagines a “utopia of suppressed meaning.”29 One way of resisting the present as history, full of received meaning in received narrative, would be to imagine yourself as free to choose your past, your
160
Philosophy of History After Hayden White
genealogy, your reality. If you are the self-proclaimed fulfillment of something that happened long ago and far away, then your present ceases to be history and becomes something else.
It is hardly surprising that White would find this figural dynamic; it was inherent in his ideas from an early date. In 1967, White cancelled one of his graduate seminars; it was on European thought in the 1920s. We graduate students wondered where he had gone, and so we asked him when he returned. He replied simply that he had been in Colorado speaking at a biology conference. Years later I read in the proceedings of the conference what he said there; I mention it here because I think it should be better known, although both David Harlan and I have discussed it in Re-Figuring Hayden White.30 White claimed that our human status as biological creatures, obeying the biological system of genetics, is meaningful to us only to a limited extent. Insofar as we lead “distinctively human lives” within time and change, we must take into account what he calls a “historical system” (the title of the talk was “What Is a Historical System?”), which reverses the genetic logic of biology. Our biological ancestors may determine who we are as animals, but when it comes to our cultural genealogy, we are in charge, at least potentially, because we choose our ancestors. White's example was the end of the ancient world, explained in three lines.
What happened between the third and eighth centuries was that men ceased to regard themselves as descendants of their Roman forbears and began to treat themselves as descendents of their Judeo-Christian predecessors.31
White's summary: “I am suggesting that historical systems differ from biological systems by their capacity to act as if they could choose their own ancestors.”32 This fictional cultural ancestry was the crisis of the Roman world—to act as if one were free. By converting in some way to Christianity, they were choosing as ancestors a group of Eastern Mediterranean Jews who had lived centuries before and had nothing to do with their biological forebears. This happened, for some reason, but it happened.
The 1967 talk at the biology conference contained within it the figure that was fulfilled by White's later turn to figuralism as a form of realism different from the genetic kind. Figuralism, as White redefined it, does not see the present as history (as a determined thing), and figural realism, as Auerbach conceived of it, is a special form of mimesis. It is what Nietzsche must have had in mind when he said that historians begin to believe backwards; White's figuralism is a choosing backwards. The figure, as Lyotard might put it, is what “will have
Hopeful Monsters or, The Unfulfilled Figure
161
been the case,” the future anterior. Because White's notion of narrative is based on emplotment, rather than on voice or topic; the plot creates the tale, and it does this backwards. Only at the end of the tale do we know whether we have a comedy, tragedy, or whatever. Figuralism in its original form as a mechanism for narrative imagines a very narrow cosmos, with only two dimensions—forward and backward, prolepsis and analepsis; it is all the product of the arrow of time, at least on a given level of discourse. Only with the fulfillment do we know the figure's truth. But the figure lends itself to foreshadowing for those who claim to be armed with special insight, as the fulfillment does to backshadowing.
Backshadowing turns the past into a tightly emplotted drama, and insists that the actors (like stage actors) pretend not to know what the ending will be, but actually do know, or ought to. Signs of the denouement are being signaled throughout the drama. As Chekhov said, if a gun hangs over the mantle in the first act, it must go off by the end of the third. It is the outcome that determines what events occur in the drama—everything is focused backwards. And we judge the actors by the outcome, because we have the feeling that they should have known.33
Was the Holocaust the inevitable result of cultural and political events, or the free choice of individuals who could have been stopped? The preference for the former attitude, I think, is an attempt to match the magnitude of the event with a large and powerful explanatory mechanism. To say that it was all the fault of a handful, or even a nation, of individuals, is to diminish the event. It was, however, an unimaginable event. The paradoxes of backshadowing are described by Michael André Bernstein:
On a historical level, there is a contradiction between conceiving of the Shoah as simultaneously unimaginable and inevitable. On an ethical level, the contradiction is between saying no one could have foreseen the triumph of genocidal anti-Semitism, while also claiming that those who stayed in Europe are in part responsible for their fate because they failed to anticipate the danger.34
Bernstein's warning against backshadowing—presuming that the truth of the fulfillment was evident in its figure at the time of the figure—reminds us that figural understanding has its dangers. Because in the present, if it is seen as history, fulfillments are apparent and choose their figures, but figures are much harder to make out. What we take to be great events may turn out to be forgotten; the thing that was not noticed may assume a great meaning. The absence of a clear historical meaning in an open present has something of the sublime about it, bringing into view another concept from White's
162
Philosophy of History After Hayden White
armory. Lyotard comes close to describing the open figure, without a fulfillment in view, in his evocation of the sublime. “It takes place, on the contrary, when the imagination fails to present an object which might, if only in principle, come to match a concept.”35
White has used the example of a promise to illustrate the relation of figure and fulfillment. To make a promise is to put in place a figure, which may or may not be fulfilled—or “kept,” as we say of promises. If kept, the figure-fulfillment logic is maintained, according to this example. Certainly, Christian doctrine (but not Jewish) would see the commandments given to Moses on Mount Zion as a figural promise, waiting to be “kept” or fulfilled by the Beatitudes of the Sermon on the Mount in the New Testament. Presumably, without the New Testament fulfillment that forms the model for Dante's, and Auerbach's, and White's figuralism, the Old Testament would be waiting for an infusion of spiritual meaning that could be provided only by a Messiah. And, to be sure, this describes the attitude of hopefulness in the Hebrew messianic tradition. This is not to say that there is any explicit theological foundation in any of the modern discourses of figuralism and narrative, although in Walter Benjamin we find a historical theorist who might disagree. The post-theological role of the figure, however, remains.
What I am suggesting here is that the notion of figuralism that is the basis of narrative understanding and of historical reasoning, as White describes it, has a Messianic anticipation at its heart. Like the Jewish wish at Passover—“Next year in Jerusalem”—there is a hopefulness, a speech-act that reaches out for a fulfillment that may or may not come. This is a “hopeful monster,” an unfulfilled figure. (I borrow the phrase “hopeful monsters” from genetics, where it once described a mutant that survives and may lead to a new species.) What has interested me about figuralism is the idea of the unfulfilled figure. Any event may become a figure, but that cannot happen until it is fulfilled, somehow, for some reason. Then we may view it as a foreshadowing of the later happening; the usual rhetoric of prolepsis and analepsis is pertinent. Until the fulfillment has occurred, which is to say nothing other than that we have chosen the former (or lower level) happening as our figure, the candidate for figurehood is an orphan, unclaimed like a pound puppy. At that point—and that point may well last forever—it has no meaning historically, but it may potentially become many things.
The unfulfilled figures that I have called “hopeful monsters” resemble both Lyotard's happenings for which we do not yet have concepts, and Giorgio Agamben's “whatevers.”
Hopeful Monsters or, The Unfulfilled Figure
163
Lyotard writes: “Those are Ideas of which no presentation is possible. Therefore, they impart no knowledge about reality (experience); they also prevent the free union of the faculties which gives rise to the sentiment of the beautiful; and they prevent the formation and stabilization of taste. They can be said to be unpresentable.”36 These are not events because they lack the essential narrativity needed to constitute an event of any magnitude. So I call them “happenings,” part of the “advent,” the undifferentiated happenings in time.37 As it happens, the best description I know of for the nature and import of these hopeful monsters is in Leo Tolstoy, where they are a theater of sideshadows, an endlessly complex set of possibilities, things that might become events. Precisely because we live in time—except when we play the role of narrators, historical or other, and know how the story comes out—we share the uncertainty of the hopeful monsters, waiting for something to create a plot, or perhaps not. And this is what White describes at the conclusion of his essay on War and Peace as Tolstoy's message: “History is not something that one understands; it is something one endures—if one is lucky.”38
There is another aspect of the novel, however, that White, surprisingly, resists, even as he takes note of it. This is the sense that the meaning of it all is, to use Saul Morson's words, “hidden in plain view,” in the tiny, innumerable happenings of everyday life. White writes of the Epilogue to the novel: “nothing really happens,” and blames Tolstoy for simply tacking on the final epilogue that recounts what became of the principals of the story a decade later.39 The novel “stumbles to a close,” as though Tolstoy were bored and “somewhat irritated” with his characters. The fulfilled Natasha, for instance, ferociously domestic and matronly, has lost her figure. Echoing Yeats, White asks: “Did she put on this new spirit with the weight she gained after her marriage?” He is frustrated, but by what?
In his book on War and Peace, written two decades before White's essay on Tolstoy, Morson accuses White of embracing “simultaneously the two epistemological poles between which Pierre alternates.”40 These poles are that historical events are meaningless, and that this meaninglessness is a good thing, for it leads to a sublime embrace of transformative action. Perhaps Pierre Bezhukov is not the worst character to resemble. He becomes, after all, the richest man in Moscow and the husband of Natasha, but it may be useful to examine this not unperceptive observation before looking further at what White has written since on Tolstoy's “mastertext.”
What would it mean to say that historical events are meaningless? This proposition must presume some situation in which human beings, considering
164
Philosophy of History After Hayden White
history, find no meaning there and consequently derive no lesson from their contemplation. And it is not hard to come to this conclusion on the basis of one of White's major works, the essay “The Politics of Historical Interpretation,” where he talks about the suppression of the historical sublime. At crucial points, his syntax becomes quite tortured. For example, two sentences:
What is ruled out by conceiving the historical object in such a way that not to conceive it in that way would constitute prima facie evidence of want of “discipline”?41
And:
In my view, the theorists of the sublime had correctly divined that whatever dignity and freedom human beings could lay claim to could come only by way of what Freud called a “reaction-formation” to an apperception of history's meaninglessness.42
The triple negation of the first sentence, a rhetorical question that seems to require the answer, historical meaninglessness, and a clear acknowledgment of history's meaninglessness in the second, are misleading. They imply only that “history” has no meaning apart from the interpretive activity of the humans who make it. What White has asserted is not that history has no meaning, but rather that it possesses many meanings, as many as the protocols of our age and situation, and the force of our need and will, afford us. At the level of historical reflection, there will always be a meaning—or contesting meanings—offered, because there will always be a situation in which people must suffer and hope. At the level of metahistorical reflection, however, these meanings are figures of our capacity to create meanings, a capacity White has been describing since Metahistory. This is why the metahistorical level views the level of practice ironically.
It is important to keep in mind when considering the systematic Hayden White that there are usually two levels at which the same thing has different consequences. The model for this may be said to be Kant's Analytic of the Sublime, where at one level, we feel pain, anxiety, and even terror (as Edmund Burke had noted) when confronted with something that escapes our conceptual abilities. At another level, however, this produces pleasure, the pleasure of the sublime, because we are able to observe ourselves considering aesthetic ideas that surpass mere nature. So it is with irony, which is dispiriting when it dominates the field of experience, as was the case in the late eighteenth century, but liberating when it considers the field of experience as open to many
Hopeful Monsters or, The Unfulfilled Figure
165
conceptions, of which the former sort of irony is only one. So it is with narrative, which is oppressive when it reveals to us the fulfillment for all possible figures in the form of a masterplot; this is the Grand Narrative (grand récit) that Lyotard associated with totality. However, the only escape from this turns out to be a multitude of little narratives (petits récits) that reveal to us, not the many sides of reality, but our many powers of rendering and fulfilling the figures that we have chosen. Finally, meaning, as Barthes or Tolstoy feared, can saturate the world and present us with the banal, useless maps that we encounter everywhere. Yet an explosion of meanings in a truly creative world (of modern art, for example) has the opposite effect. More irony, more narratives, more meanings, and, of course, more histories, are the only antidotes to the problem. And they must be taken at a different level, an aesthetic level, which will concern itself with, as Pater said, the forms of things. This reverses the normal hierarchy, in which the more general transcends the multiplicity, and demonstrates its true content. And this reversal is the scandal of the aesthetic.
Tolstoy believes in “creation by potential,” in which every moment of time has a vast number of potentials, all the things that might (or might not) follow from the moment. Things that might, in other words, figure forth many possible fulfillments. “Each present moment is to have its own irreducible integrity, and to demand details that are potentially, but perhaps not actually, significant.”43 What I am saying is that reality, the lives we lead, consist of unfulfilled figures, which we persistently mistake for, on the one hand, proper completions of past foreshadowings, and, on the other, as reliable prognostications of the future dreams we project. The idea that, at any moment, our plans may go anywhere at all is disheartening, because it suggests that our wills cannot prevail and that our history may be, well… meaningless. Tolstoy's novel may be read as a satire on the human propensity for planning; or put another way, it challenges our relentless optimism that our actions are figures that will lead to great fulfillments. Again, Morson:
Novels, like histories, are themselves ‘plans'—or models—of how we plan. They, too, select a few causal lines from among the indefinitely large number that govern real events, are written and read according to tricks of art and memory, and cannot escape from their implicit participation—and implication—in the historical process.44
And White has noted this:
And at the very end of the novel, in the epilogue that shows us the Bezukhov and Rostov families in 1820, Karataev is invoked as a test for Pierre's desire to
166
Philosophy of History After Hayden White
return to the world of society and take part in a political movement. Natasha asks Pierre whether Karataev would have approved of him and his plans to enter the political fight. “No, he would not have approved,” said Pierre after reflection. “What he would have approved of is our family life. He was always so anxious to find seemliness, happiness, and peace in everything, and I should have been proud to let him see us.” This is the last scene in the novel. It is not an ending, but we have no idea what the future holds for Pierre and Natasha.45
Here, surprisingly, White calls out for meaning, for narrative fulfillment, some hint that a thousand-odd pages of life will pay off for the survivors, whom he calls “vapid representatives of [Tolstoy's] growing archaism.”46 Perhaps. But it is also possible to see them as living in sideshadows, like us, with “no idea what the future holds.” Although Pierre is always energetically searching for whatever, Natasha knows herself to be a “whatever,” that is, in Giorgio Agamben's terms, she is a singularity that is determined by the “totality of its possibilities.”47 This knowledge disrupts the present as history (and goodness knows, they have experienced a lot of history—Pierre had Napoleon in his gunsight!). It frustrates narrative. Instead of archaism, one might find modernism here, a rejection of what was bad—in White's own terms—about the nineteenth century. White says that Tolstoy gives us a feel for the territory, not a map; the nineteenth century was full of maps. They turned any present into its history, rather than its possibilities.
White is ambivalent about everyday life and its pathos. If the “hopeful monsters” that we all are are not fulfilled, so that a backshadowing choice of direction can mark our taking charge of ourselves in an existential gesture, we lack narrative interest. And, as Hans Ulrich Gumbrecht writes, White is not alone in this:
In Auerbach's eyes fate as concrete everyday life was always depressing. But he also experienced everyday life as always elevating and exhilarating because it implied the obligation to impose the forms of composure and authentic individuality to the suffering which it caused. This may have been why Auerbach, instead of trying to escape his contemporary world, eagerly exposed himself to the fate of its challenges and trials.48
Dante's idea of life as figural, to be fulfilled in another life, as the Old Testament is fulfilled in another dispensation, inspires Auerbach to emphasize Dante's originality in asserting the essential historical reality of this life, thus rejecting any notion that it is merely allegorical or symbolic or in any other sense less than fully real. It is in this sense that Dante's Comedy is a landmark in the
Hopeful Monsters or, The Unfulfilled Figure
167
Western idea of realistic representation that Auerbach took as his subject. And yet, there is also the sense in Dante that the figure—the unenlightened human life of Francesca or Brunetto Latini—is preordained, in the mind of God at least. Neither Auerbach nor White present figuralism as an explicit theology, but there is a hint of this in the idea that the figure is like a promise. In this presentation, as White puts it forth, the figure is always linked to a potential fulfillment from the moment of its emergence in the flow of events. Often, this is the case: declarations of war imply conclusions, victory or defeat; coronations imply reigns, as birth implies life and death. There are, however, many happenings that imply nothing, or rather that imply anything at all. These happenings generally have no (intrinsic) meaning or importance, but sometimes they become crucial to human events. Insofar as they have no importance, they are not exactly figures, because no fulfillment attaches itself to them at the moment of their appearance. And it is unlikely that these events will ever be fulfilled in any way. They promise nothing. It is tempting to say that from a historical perspective it is these events that cause “the reality effect” that Roland Barthes has described as a part of realist literature. The reality effect is characteristic of description, as opposed to narrative, and it is scandalous for narrative, which Barthes believes to be as figurally organized as White does, although he never uses the term.
Description is entirely different: it has no predictive mark; “analogical,” its structure is purely summatory and does not contain that trajectory of choices and alternatives which gives narration the appearance of a huge traffic-control center, furnished with a referential (and not merely discursive) temporality.49
In other words, Barthes presents narrative in the same controlling, backwardlooking mode as White. In a narrative, the end determines the beginning; the plot establishes what leads up to its outcome; the fulfillment entails all of its figures. This is the traffic-control center. The items that are not entailed, however, and appear to be purely descriptive and arbitrary, are scandalous to narrative because they seem to be outside the economy of figuralism. Barthes famously names and validates these things as the “reality effect”—giving significance to the insignificant. What they signify is reality itself. In a written narrative, for a formalist reader, these reality effects will remain significantly insignificant permanently. Nothing will call them to life, because their function is residual. They are the residue that points away from the excessive organization of narrativity toward the unredeemed meaninglessness of “concrete reality.” The tension between text and life is found here.
It is important to distinguish Roland Barthes's reality effect from the mimesis of Erich Auerbach. White correctly describes Auerbach's mimesis—a fully
168
Philosophy of History After Hayden White
historicized vision of human reality—with the fulfilled figure. “The figurefulfillment model is, therefore, a model for comprehending the syntagmatic dimensions of historical happening and for constructing the narrative line for the presentation of that history.”50 This notion of reality as “syntagmatic” and as having a narrative “line” is precisely the opposite of what Barthes meant by his “reality effect.” Barthes understood that syntax and line were effects of narrative, and that narrativity, once foregrounded, undercut any sense of reality that was not a construction. Therefore, he posited a residue that was not part of any syntax and did not fit into a storyline. The element of this residue was a hopeful monster, and its presence attested to a reality that was not entirely under the control of narrative. When White speaks of the “mimesis effect” in his book on figuralism, he reminds us that the Western representation of reality described by Auerbach is in the thrall of narrative, which is a form whose content, he has often explained, is realistic only in a highly mediated way. This mediation, according to Barthes, ceaselessly substitutes meaning for a copy of events themselves. White comments: “And it would follow that the absence of narrative capacity or a refusal of narrative indicates an absence or refusal of meaning itself.”51 Here we have precisely the monstrousness of the unfulfilled figure—it is abandoned, meaningless, a copy of pure reality.
Figuralism, as described by White and Auerbach, is the controlling brain of any meaningful representation of human reality. It is what makes narrative work. The question is whether it is a standing insult to the dignity of human life, suggesting as it does in this account that promises have been made that are to be kept, even though we all know that they rarely are, and that life is as disillusioning as Stendhal and Flaubert make it out to be. From the start, White has held to Louis Mink's declaration that narratives are human creations, not found in the historical record, but rather constructed after the fact. For White, it is important to note that these constructions are made for specific human purposes; the meaning of life is placed there by people acting out of their own motives. This attitude toward narrative and history has been disputed, notably by David Carr, whose phenomenological perspective clashes with the existentialism of White.
We argue, by contrast, that action, life, and historical existence are themselves structured narratively, independently of their presentation in literary form, and that this structure is practical before it is aesthetic or cognitive. This is not to say that the literary embodiment of narrative is incidental to the life from which it springs, or that it has no effect on that life. We have said of historical writing that it is an extension of historical existence, its continuation by other means;
Hopeful Monsters or, The Unfulfilled Figure
169
something similar could be said of fiction in relation to individual existence, though we have not tried to argue that here. The effect of both forms of writing on the culture from which they derive is unmistakable. But what they provide is examples of how the narrative form can be filled in, representations of how to live, both as individuals and as communities. But they do not provide the narrative form itself.52
Carr believes that the traffic-control center that Barthes found in narrative and its figural entailment is an aspect of human life, which is frighteningly dominated by the relationship of figure and fulfillment that produces narrative meaning. He writes of stories: “They are told in being lived and lived in being told. The actions and sufferings of life can be viewed as a process of telling ourselves stories, listening to these stories, and acting them out or living them through.”53 The scripted quality of life in this rendering is similar to the scripted artificiality of narrative. It is just that we have the script in our heads, collectively.
My contention is simply that there is a contradiction between the closed text of figuralism, in which everything is taken to be a promise in the mind of some great promise-keeper, and the open world of the untellable sublime, where we can speak of things only in terms of a language drawn from another universe—of “hopeful monsters” and “reality effects” and “unfulfilled figures.” This latter world, I suggest, is the one we live in, and try to overcome by fitting our lives into the narratives—that is, by becoming the figures—that David Carr describes. Redeeming the everyday would seem to be the point of this, but Tolstoy reminds us that in everyday life, with no promises and no need for hope of anything better, let alone a hope for “the historical,” we find all the meaning there is, and all that we need.
By transforming the horizontal figuralism of the Church Fathers (Old Testament figures and New Testament fulfillments) and the vertical figuralism of Dante (earthly figures and fulfillments in eternity) into a narrative figuralism that is both horizontal and vertical, White has inflated the figural process in a way analogous to his inflation of the rhetorical tropes into narrative devices in Metahistory.54 The inflated figuralism that White puts forth is horizontal in its relation to emplotment—what happens in a discourse will be shown to have meaning at the later moment when the plot has emerged. In this sense, everything is to be made meaningful in a narrative precisely because narrative is figural in its essence. At the same time, White notes, any portion of a discourse may figure forth another discursive layer by serving as a microcosmic generator of the broader view; for a text may be a figure to be fulfilled in its interpretive
170
Philosophy of History After Hayden White
rendering, which becomes itself a figure to be fulfilled in an examination of its context, and so forth. This is the method Auerbach uses in Mimesis. Citation is the classic example. To include a foreign body—the cited text—into one's own textual world is to seek a way to generate another world, using the cited text as a synecdoche for one or another aspect of its possible contexts. Auerbach, to be sure, uses the inflatable figure throughout Mimesis. It is White, however, who identifies and articulates this device.
White understood figuralism before it became a concept in his system. The fulfillment of a figure, after all, is nothing more than a backward attribution of meaning or historical relevance; it is the move by which the present takes hold of the past and makes of it what is necessary. And this is what White has been describing, on the one hand, and calling for, on the other, for decades. His call is for the assertion of the rights of the present. The present, however, is a divided thing in this view. We can make meaning by fulfilling the figures of our past, either as interpreters, or, as David Carr would assert, in our ordinary lives, as agents, private or historical. But in another sense we are cast as “hopeful monsters,” living everydays that have no compelling narrative shape, except the importance of their ordinariness, the ordinariness of reality before it becomes a narrative “effect.” This meaning is “hidden in plain view,” and it describes what I have called the hopeful monster, the unfulfilled figure. It is not the present as history, but as present; and it is something any “figural realism” should take note of.