5
“Nobody Does It Better”
RADICAL HISTORY AND HAYDEN WHITE
Keith Jenkins
I want to begin this essay for Hayden White—an essay inconceivable without White and therefore indebted to him—by sketching out, in its very much longer first part, what I take to be the necessary conditions of possibility for the production of a radical history—by which I mean a history that, from the point of view of the current “state of the situation,” is deemed to be of little or no significance. What do I need to be able to think this kind of history, and what are some of the consequences of doing so? And in part two, I want to explain how I see all of this relating back to White.
Part One
Without further preliminaries, then, let me re-pose the question governing this first part: what are the necessary conditions of possibility for the production of a radical history? And here I want to take a step back so that I can identify as my starting point certain ontological presuppositions which, acting as axioms, will then allow me to build a history thereon, axioms and the resultant history both being, on this occasion, presented in tabular form (and thus somewhat skeletally, impressionistically).
(i)	I take as my originary axiom the existence of matter, of materiality, of “actuality.” I take it that the “stuff” we call, for example, the
106 KEITH JENKINS
world, the universe, etc., is really out there and is therefore not the product of my current mental state. Of course I cannot prove this; I cannot get out of my head to check if there is something outside of it, but my working premise is that there is. In that sense I’m a realist, but a realist of a certain kind; namely, a transcendental realist—by which I mean that not only does such stuff exist (and has existed previously and will exist in the future), but that it transcends each and every attempt in each and every social formation to reduce it to their inhabitants’ experiences, vocabularies, lexicons, abstractions, such that they might think that they really do know it. For it seems apparent that the actuality of “existence” skips free of every (definitive) anthropomorphism. Yet at the same time, such transcendental realism does not commit me to metaphysical realism (namely, that we can know the way things are independent of the way we access them). Rather, my type of realism commits me to precisely the opposite. Insofar as we can present examples of our intuitions via various representations, such intuitions/representations cannot escape the exact circumstances of their production; cannot shrug off the pressure of time and chance and so are thus radically contingent (in this instance, radically meaning forever irreducible to definitive meanings). In other words I hold the view (with Richard Rorty) that while the “world” is “out there,” meanings are not; that while the world is “out there,” truths are not, since meanings and truths are in sentences and sentences are not “out there.”1 There is therefore a radical break—an ontological break—between the “actuality” of the world (all that “stuff”) and so-called reality, such reality being created/constituted by our human discourses which are “about” but which do not knowingly correspond to that to which they “refer.” Indeed, it is these discourses—broadly construed—which alone make the world variously meaning-full, and we know of no other common reality than that thus constituted.
(2)	This reduction of any “knowledge” we “may think we have” of the world (past, present, future) to the contingencies of knowledge production, distribution, reception, etc., means—as already noted but now rearticulated slightly—that we can never have access to the actualities of “stuff” plain, pure. That such “worlds” as ours are always just that, ours, and are thus inescapably human, inescapably meaning here, that just as giraffes or eagles have giraffe and eagle worlds—have their own species
Nobody Does It Better 107
bound “readings” of the stuff of actuality, never cognizant of human readings of the same phenomena—so, locked up in our own human readings, we have no access to giraffe and eagle “reality.” Nor is there some form of neutral actuality/reality that offers a way of adjudicating between different species’ readings in the hope of finding a trans-species “real reality.” Thus we human animals (“just one more species doing its best”) are indeed just doing our best to pragmatically live out a life unknown to other species and which is for all of us—both them and us—ultimately unfathomable.
(3)	Such irreducibility of the actuality of the stuff of our “worded world” to our human sensations, experiences, concepts, categories, schemas, analogies, whereby we try to transform our “experiences” of the “concrete” into the “concrete in thought”; the inadequacy of every representation to fully capture the objects “subjectified” by our gaze (to gain subject-object identity; full presence, etc.), means that, when carrying out our meaning-making operations, we cannot but become (on the back of our transcendental realism) intersubjective idealists; namely, that it is we who make our actuality “real” by endowing attributes to stuff which thus realizes “it.” This is a way of still thinking of “actuality”—after all these years—along the lines of the old Kantian “thing-in-itself”; as that un-graspable excess which thwarts (“for all we know”) all our efforts to make things identical to us; the same as us. I therefore hold, axiomatically, that the stuff of existence exceeds our every limit, transverses all our boundaries, escapes our most definitive closures, making both our experiential actions and our thoughts unremittingly and inescapably open: ludic, aleatory, heuristic, and thus, once again, radically contingent. And here we might recall some recent and well-known formulations of this excess: Albert Camus’ absurd, the sublime of Jean-Franqois Lyotard and White, Alain Badiou’s multiples, Jacques Lacan’s Real, Jacques Derrida’s unde-cidables, Julia Kristeva’s semiotic, Jean Baudrillard’s symbolic-semiotic spiral. Of course, we must not for a moment think of such formulations as ever being adequate to the excess. For the excess, the sublime, is not a delimited object or thing; it is not something which we knowingly “lack” and which, if found, would allow us to fulfill our (sometime) human desire for completion, closure, totality. For the sublime is forever unpresentable, is something unable to ever be historicized, is precisely nonontolo-
108 KEITH JENKINS
gizable—otherwise it just wouldn’t be sublime—and is therefore just a further dimension of our human imagination which posits that beyond our every closure there lurks an “undoing outside,” which, despite all our attempts to disavow or negate or just plain forget, hauntingly persists to remind us that beyond all the “somethings” we have made out of “nothing” (making “something out of nothing” is the story of our lives), is the sense of that (constitutive) nothing that can spell ruin for even our very best representations. Thus to my growing list of axioms—to my transcendental realism, intersubjective idealism, and the undoing sublime—I add radical antirepresentationalism (which, in a nutshell and following Paul de Man, can be put like this: that it is not a priori certain that language functions according to principles that are those, or are like those, of the phenomenal world. And that it is, therefore, not a priori certain that language is a reliable source of information about anything but itself). To this antirepresentationalism, I want to add a certain type of nominalism, a (metaphorical) naming process, that, because of its unavoidable violence, forcefully welds together the ontological (and the ontic) to the political, thus to what is axiomatically just one expression of the (power) political: history. In articulating this interconnection, I have found it useful to think of this production of meaning as having (after various suggestions by Jacques Derrida) three levels of violence.
(4)	To make (to realize) a meaning, to bring meaning into the world, is ultimately an act of violence—a violence of “writing” that can be called first-level violence. Because there is no one-to-one natural correspondence between word and world, no literal entailment of signifier to signifier and thence to the putative signified and thence to the putative referent, then to get the actuality of the world into a “language” it never asked to be put in is to always establish both a power and a metaphorical relationship (that tree as if it really was a tree, that past as if it really was history). Yet, accurate as this is, Derrida thinks that the notion of a metaphorical relationship still runs the risk of carrying (naive) realist overtones, in that it may suggest that there is (already) a meaningful “reality,” some solid ground(ing), to which the sign-system refers—albeit figuratively. But obviously there isn’t. Consequently, the founding concepts of meaning are instances not of metaphor generally but the (metaphorical) trope of catachresis: a violent production of meaning, an imposition, an abuse. Derrida:
Nobody Does It Better 109
I have always tried to expose the way in which philosophy is literary, not so much because it is metaphor but because it is catachresis. The term metaphor implies a relation to an original “property” of “meaning,” a “proper” sense to which it indirectly or equivocally refers, whereas catachresis is a violent production of meaning, an abuse which refers to no exterior or proper norm.2
Yet, while this violent call to meaning is, of course, a necessary one if any meanings are to be produced at all—since this violent imposition is the very condition of the possibility of meaning—Derrida is concerned to show how this naming process can never achieve what it would like to achieve; namely, literal, full presence. And for him it is precisely differance, as the irreducible tension (aporia) between what he calls the “idealized transcendental gesture” and the necessity of empirical inscription, which is the site of its unavoidable undoing.
Now, how can this undoing be developed in what is termed the level of secondary violence; well, differance again says it all. The argument goes thus.
For Derrida, every sign wants to say what it “really” means. This is the sign’s motivation; the idealized gesture of the (quasi) transcendental—to achieve full presence and so forth. Yet, for the sign to operate as a sign it must be irreducible to one context, it must be repeatable (albeit always slightly differently) in other contexts (iterable), otherwise it just wouldn’t be a sign. Consequently, the necessity of empirical inscription guarantees the logical impossibility of the purity of the transcendental gesture. Nevertheless, the “myth” of the transcendental (universals, absolutes . . .) remains the animating force behind the signs of, say, Justice, Law, Ethics, or History, such that it is here that the aporetic tension inevitably resides. For while the originary violence of the sign enables us to think the transcendental gesture, that gesture is never realizable at the empirical level. Consequently, Justice or Law or Ethics or History are always only accessible at the level of the empirical/iterable (as justices, laws, ethics, histories . . .) and yet are irreducible to them. Historical discourse then (now concentrating on “history”) cannot ever escape indeterminacy; cannot escape differance; of being always both the idealized gesture and iterable—that is, being always open to new inscriptions, meanings, to interminable redescriptions. The fulfillment of any idealized gesture is thus permanently delayed; will always be “to come” yet will never arrive: there is no “last instance,” no “last word,” no closure, no “final solution.” We
IIO
KEITH JENKINS
shall never know what History/history “really is”—that will remain a secret, like the name and the face of God. Its putative aim—the truth-full reconstruction of the past—is thus an impossible “myth,” yet one which continuously energizes historians’ productions. We shall, courtesy of dif-ferance, never know what the nature of history is any more than we shall know The Law, Justice, Ethics, or God; we shall never know the past “in and for itself”; for its “own sake.”
Now, it is precisely this “fact” (and if there is a fact, this is it) that Derrida thinks we have tried to forget; to disavow. And it is this refusal to remember the violent, contingent, and thus arbitrary relationship of words and things in favor of literal truths, permanent categories, invariable essences, and nonrelativistic ethics, that goes under the name of secondary violence—the violence of forgetting.
This “mind-world” of secondary violence—of “realism,” of repre-sentationalism, of “real” ethical imperatives—is the one most of us habitually inhabit: this is our “reality,” this is what we “take for granted.” And it is therefore precisely the unreality of these realities which Derrida and others wish us to recall by deconstructing via differance those protective, fictive shelters of secondary violence which, if I can put it this way, the overwhelming thrust of the Western tradition erected as barriers against “the other(s)” (modernity and the modern nation-state being the swan song of this tradition). I mean, all those “infinite fixes,” those rigid designators, those binary oppositions, those various/sometime white, ethnic, gendered, onto-theological fantasies which, embodied in phal-lologocentric articulations, have included amongst their vehicles numerous histories, not least those finding sometime expression in uppercase (metanarrative) and lowercase (certaintist/academic/professional) forms. Derrida, as I read him—along with other radical post-structuralist/post-modern historians—is concerned to remove all and every remaining, privileging carapace insofar as they have tried (and try) to help legitimate reasons excusing acts of third-level violence; that is, the everyday empirical violence of exclusion, rape, murder, war, genocide. At which point, the deconstructionist drive works backwards from third- to first-level violence . . . for it can now be shown that level three violence is not of a necessary kind, but is just the arbitrary outcome of its catachretic founding, thus opening it up—de-realizing reality—to “alternative realities” which could be—which ought to be—explicitly liberating, empowering, and uncom
Nobody Does It Better
in
promisingly emancipating for those people needing these things: most of us. This is not to say that any such “new reality” will not be “arbitrary,” will not be another simulacrum, but the deconstructionist hope is that this world might be a better one than the one we inhabit now. This is a hope for a “lesser violent” world based on the interminable revisions of its axioms, an endlessly “open” world that, recognizing its undecidability, its provisionality, refuses all closures. Ernesto Laclau has seen the unavoidability of this better than most:
The metaphysical (logocentric) discourse of the West is coming to an end, and philosophy in its twilight has performed a last service for us in the deconstruction of its own terrain. Let us think, for instance, of Derrida's undecidables. Once undecidability has reached the ground itself—once the organisation of a certain camp is governed by a hegemonic decision—hegemonic because it is not objectively determined, because different decisions were also possible—then the realm of philosophy comes to an end and the realm of politics begins. This realm will be inhabited by a different type of discourse . . . which . . . constructs the world on the “grounds” of radical undecidability.3
This is the sort of politics the radical historian is committed to.
(5)	And so I come now to some of the details of that radical history which might (possibly) be used to help realize such emancipating goals by building on the above set of “open” axioms a sort of superstructural history that might transform and supersede the “normal” historians' “traditional calling” by responding to a call that comes not from the past at all but directly from ethics, from politics. Radical historians, unlike “normal” ones, don't go to work to understand the past on it own terms and for its own sake; radical historians don't work on behalf of the people who lived in the past: they work for us.
So to the question of how to proceed to the establishment of the necessary conditions for the production of such a radical history, my answer, on this occasion, is dialectically. That is to say that I want to show, initially, how the conditions of possibility for a closed, empirical/episte-mologically striving nonradical history—for a history that attempts to establish assured historical knowledge, understanding, and meaning—cannot ever be met: this acts as my thesis. Of course, traditional historians of whatever stripe—the majority of the history profession, say—are not unaware of some of the factors that deny them surety; they intuit that
KEITH JENKINS
112
their type of history has epistemological (and/or even scientific) ambitions it lacks the means to deliver. But more often than not it is “business as usual,” as such troubling thoughts are brushed under the carpet or, if raised to the level of consciousness, are articulated as “problems” to solve, “challenges” to overcome, and “difficulties” to work through, as they “come to terms with the past.” And it is my argument—my antithesis—that such limits and difficulties are not seen by radical historians as problems at all but as opportunities for newness. Radical historians thus turn the weaknesses of “proper history” into strengths, celebrate the fact that historians’ representations (including their own) are always failed representations, that historians qua historians always get the past wrong, and that it is these “facts” which become the basis for a new synthesis which, discarding the desire for closure, builds uncertainly on uncertainty. At which point old (modernist) empirical/epistemologically striving histories in whatever case—histories that can never achieve closure nor prevent interminable openness—hopefully “drop out of the conversation” as radical (postmodern) histories take their place. There is no need for any nostalgia here—modernist histories have had their day in the sun—and thus there is no need to keep “a foot in both camps” in some middle-ground, conserving consensus: we can all become thoroughly postmodern.
* * *
So let me now give some substance to the above argument, beginning by outlining my thesis, that is, by sketching out the irremovable obstacles to the establishment of any empirical/epistemological history of closure. And let me retabulate as I work through six relevant areas.
(i)	First there is the problematicizing contamination—the interpretive bulk—of the historian as author. Frank Ankersmit sets the scene and triggers a train of thought. Ankersmit:
We have historical writing in order to compensate for the absence of the past. So whereas in the case of pictorial and political representation the represented has a logical priority to its representation, in the case of historical representation the reverse is the case, namely, that the represented—that is, the past— depends for its (onto)logical status on its representation. No representation, no past.4
No representation, no past: exactly. And because such representations by no means come from nowhere, then it is the “writers” of history,
Nobody Does It Better 113
historians (and those acting as if they were historians), who have a prior “logical priority”: no representation, no history is (tautologically) “correct,” as is, no representer, no representation.
Representers—historians—come in all shapes and sizes to the production of the historicized past, but none come innocently. Historians are affected by all kinds of suasive desires and material everyday pressures that are not left behind when they enter the study—by ambitions, jealousies, careerist aspirations; by institutionalization, duplicities, and disavowals; by niggling worries, acts of gratitude and support and various incompetencies—that cannot avoid unevenly, singularly, influencing and conditioning the practices and the products of the author-historian. History is a contaminated discourse that cannot be purified of the tensions and ambiguities—never fully knowable—of situation, circumstance, authorization, legitimation, play. Any “genealogy of history,” as Sande Cohen puts it, by any half-thorough account, must demonstrate such “mixed origins,” which no appeal to the archive, the sources, the data, the facts and objectivity, can negate or transcend.5 These are the circumstances that variously and immeasurably infuse the historians’ texts with life, and that, while not ignoring the empirical/epistemological components of his-toricizations, are underdetermined by them.
(2)	In which context the next question is, what, more precisely, is these historians’ referent and its status? Could it literally be the past per se? Well, no, since that no longer exists. Moreover, even if it did, (the idea of) that past is far too complicated to become a fixed object of inquiry. For there is never a solid, “real” past that acts as the common/neutral past for everyone—any more than there is a common/neutral time it exists “in.” Rather, many different levels of many pasts and many presents and many perspectival “timings of time,” congeal and become unstuck, sometimes rapidly sometimes slowly, and these interrelationships affect how we choose, as Cohen puts it, to initiate, to accept, to reject the data of experience, interpreting and assessing inner and outer relations. Present habits and memories, continues Cohen,
incessantly weave themselves into degrees of pastness in the form of powerful memories mixed with obsessions blended with attempts to self-distract, joined with new projects of forgetting, so that there is no neutral present’s relation to the past—as. Remember that the present “is” no more objectively nor subjec
114 KEITH JENKINS
tively real than the past, as both are embroiled in the other in terms of actualization in any present . . . we are constantly dismantling and assembling the present; we are constantly dissembling the present to have a different effect/affect of and with the past.6
No stable referent here then.
So can the historian’s referent be the traces of the past, the (always already historicized) archive, as widely construed as one wishes? Well, no. Because although historians refer to the archive and to, say, the documents therein and the “facts” that may be generated out of them in terms of singular statements that “correspond” to singular or clusters of singular “evidential sources,” and though they reference these things copiously in footnotes, these things are still not their referent.
So what can it be? And the answer is simply that historians’ referent is “nothing” but the product of their inferences based upon their existential (personal, ethical, public, ideological) condition, their previous/cur-rent “dealing” in the field, their modes of prefiguration which work up the “material” they have to make it into an object capable of analysis, and their constitutive “research” concerns, theses, and so on, which, in never-stable interconnections, cause some of the traces they find/produce to become activated as relevant sources and thence as evidence for any arguments they happen to be running. (The “past itself” doesn’t have in it any arguments or problems that historians solve . . . only historians have arguments, as they seek to establish their readings over others.) And that on these bases, they then infer a past—either simple or complex—which now fits their data, their position, their inferences. And this inferential process cannot work in reverse, no matter how much pleading to the contrary. For historians cannot know the past—especially that part of it which they are putatively “finding” for the first time as they seek the holy grail of “originality”—and then search for the sources to correspond to it, thus confirming it as “knowledge.” Rather, the process is that of using “this and that” from which a past to conform to “this and that” is inferred. This inference, now the historicized past, which constitutes the figural “content” of their texts to which they refer . . . , this is their referent, a referent let us note and underline, which is “always in thought”: no one can knowingly ignore Roland Barthes’ possessive strictures on this.7
Nobody Does It Better 115
(3)	But note now some further aspect of the epistemic status of this referent. Note four things. Note, first of all, that this is a referent that cannot ever have the status of truth or definitiveness—it is only an inference after all—and it cannot be objective, either. For not only is it selfreferencing, but other self-referencers (historians) going to, say, the same archives and working on even the same traces/sources, can and do infer very different pasts; indeed, history (as historiography) is composed of such “interpretive differences” that no appeal to the facts as other histori-cizations (inferences) can close down. And, of course, lurking in this area is the old fact-value problematic which ensures that, whatever the inferred relationship between phenomena and meaning, that relationship is never entailed: “the past” can be read and “made to mean” any way you like.
Note, second, the fact that inferences are always arguments means, again, that truth cannot ever come into it.8 For as we all know, arguments are never true or false; arguments can only be valid or invalid, so that, no matter how many times “forgetful” historians slip the notion of an argument “that’s true” into their “discussions,” a true argument, like another old favorite, the true interpretation, is an oxymoron. Note, third, that because the historian’s referent is inferential then the kinds of things inferred—structures, processes, trends, watersheds, statistical runs, influences, movements, explanations, meanings—were never actually there in the first place, or at least, not in the way Lord Nelson’s flagship HMS Victory was once there. This historicized past is therefore a past which (as Hayden White puts it after Michael Oakeshott) no one ever experienced while it was in the process of taking shape, that no one ever observed, and which exists now only in the minds of, and the texts created by, historians and those acting as if they were historians. There is thus, as Carolyn Steedman has put it, “a double nothingness” in the writing of history. History is about something that never did happen in the way in which it comes to be represented (the happening exists in the telling, in the text), and it is made of materials (the inferences) that are also not there—in the archive or anywhere else.9 Jacques Ranciere has made the same point: “There is history because there is an absence . . . [and] the status of history depends on the treatment of this two-fold absence of the “thing itself” that is no longer there [the past is past] and that never was . . . because it never was such that it was [and is] told.”10 And note fourthly and finally, that the logic of inference is the logic of probability,
Il6 KEITH JENKINS
which is to say that the historian’s logic is not that of the syllogism (although syllogistic reasoning can appear in parts of the historian’s text), but rather the logic of the enthymeme, a form of logic which cannot lead to definitive conclusions—and thus closure—but can only be to the occasion for the expression of an “undecidable decision,” an aporetic choice. For enthymemes always involve a calculation of probabilities and a judgment, which leaves things open so that one can always argue to the contrary: “both sides of the case.” Consequently, history as a probable/pos-sible reading—and this is the status of all histories—is always neither rigorously true or rigorously false; at best it can have to recommend it “a certain appearance in its favour.” This, a measure of the shortfall of any epistemological claims for histories, is as good as it gets.
(4)	On this account, history has all the elements that fulfill the classic criteria for something to be of a rhetorical kind, namely, a method “to invent subjects and arguments, to organize discourse, and to make good judgements,”11 and is therefore the type of phenomenon Aristotle called illusio, which, because it deals with things contingent and opaque, can only be demonstrated or “proved.” On this reasoning history cannot ever be a science. For since history has neither a definitive object of inquiry (the “past” looked at “this way and that way” may be imagined but definitive examples of it cannot be presented), nor any definitive (universal) method of inquiry, then such a discourse, as Martin Davies has put it, “belongs properly to the realm of rhetoric,” since this is of a kind of discourse that, “not dealing with “any one definite class of objects” is “merely a faculty for furnishing arguments.” Moreover, since history and politics also have an instrumental, ideological intention, their aim is rhetorical: they are concerned to “discover the real and apparent means of persuasion"12.
Since history, then, deals only with contingencies (accidental facts, antecedent possibilities, metonymic extrapolations. . .) and proceeds by means of enthymemes (rhetorical induction) that can only provide a lesser standard of proof than “logic” offers, then history will remain interminably open, always waiting for the next interlocutor to arrive. One always comes along.
(5)	Which means, still pursuing this line of thought, that as illu-sio, as inferential acts of the imagination, historical representations and
Nobody Does It Better 117
consciousness (of this and that) are both fictive (that is, fabricated, made up, fashioned, fictio) and, as the product of rhetorical devices and stylistic figures, of an aesthetic kind. Such aesthetic figures are not, of course, subject to epistemological checks at the level of the text: an aesthetic cannot answer to epistemology. Of course, as already noted, empirical/epis-temological elements can and do (once things have been “put under a description”) operate at the level of singular statements and so on, but a discourse with a story to tell in the form of a narratio is always a manifestation of that mixture of the “found” (the sources, etc.) and the imagined (the inferences) wherein, between these two unstable poles, one is always in a radically indeterminate “middle range.” This is indeed a past as much imagined as found or, more precisely I think, more imagined than found: the aesthetic overdetermines the “empirical.” Always.
And the radical historian likes this overdetermination, likes the essentially aesthetic nature of all histories. For it is not, incidentally, as if there are some histories (say modernist ones) which really are of an em-pirical/epistemological kind “all the way down” and that these can be set against aesthetic histories (say postmodern ones). Rather, the point is that all histories—just to be histories—always have been and always will be of an aesthetic type; all histories are of the type the radical/postmodern historian raises to the level of consciousness: rhetorical/aesthetic histories are the only game in town. Thus, logically speaking, no empirical/epis-temological histories, and no empirical/epistemological historians, have ever existed on the face of the earth. Traditional historians of this type are generally quite proud and normally not at all defensive when they are called “empirical historians,” indeed, many insist on being so called. But in fact no such specimen has ever been found and it beggars belief to think that they could “ever have been imagined.” R.I.P.
(6)	And so I come directly to the area which Hayden White has pretty much made his own over the last forty years or so: narrativity. To be sure, right from the start White has been much criticized by various history establishments across the left-right ideological spectrum—what do you expect if you insist history is a kind of fiction-making?—and many historians and some theorists continue to critique, disavow, or just plain ignore him. There are some very silly people around. And of course, I am aware of some of these critiques, just as I am aware that White has made some (minor) adjustments to his position over the years. And I rec
118 KEITH JENKINS
ognize that White isn’t—nor would want to be—the closing/last word on anything. Nevertheless, all that said, I think the radical historian can subscribe—I subscribe—entirely to White’s decisionist/impositionist/sin-gular/relativistic position on narrativity. Thus I take it as read, for example, “that no given set of events figure forth apodictically the kind of meanings with which stories provide them . . . no one and nothing lives a story” (Tropics of Discourse); that “the meaning, form, or coherence of events, whether real or imaginary ones, is a function of their narrativism” (Figural Realism); that “one must face the fact that when it comes to apprehending the historical record, there are no grounds found in it for preferring one way of construing its meaning over another” (The Content of the Form); that the only grounds for choosing one perspective on history rather than another are ultimately aesthetic and ethical/political: “the aged Kant was right, in short, we are free to conceive history as we please just as we are free to make of it what we will” (Metahistory). And I sign up to all these axioms, just as I sign up to most of the detail whereby White establishes the metahistorical nature of all history productions vis-a-vis the ubiquity of tropes, emplotments, argumentative governing, and ideological positioning; I mean, can you imagine a history that is not troped, not emplotted, not governed by argumentation and not suasively/ideologi-cally intended? Could one exist? Now that is a rhetorical question.
And I subscribe to all of this because I also sign up to what I think of as White’s radical “philosophy of history.” That the past is sublime in its “whole” and problematic in its parts; that at the level of meaning (not truth but meaning) historical narratives are inexpungeably singular/rela-tivistic; that skepticism about historical knowledge/meaning is a necessary counter to dogmas everywhere; that “the past” has no legitimate gatekeepers who can tell us what we can and cannot do with it (least of all academic historians); that no one owns the past or has a monopoly on how to appropriate it; that the interminable openness of the past to countless readings should be celebrated and democratized in the hope that we might, disobediently, seriously entertain those creative historical “distortions offered by minds capable of looking at the past with the same seriousness as ourselves but with different affective and intellectual orientations.” Collectively, these practices should alert us to the conserving nature of now-preeminent narrations that tidily lock up events to keep them from being radically relocated, and which absorb experimentation
Nobody Does It Better 119
in the name of a fake pluralism; and, further, that the essence of a radical history is its future-orientated politico/ethical thrust. White:
I take ethics to be about the difference between what is (or was) the case and what ought to be (or ought to have been) the case in some department of human comportment, thought, or belief [opening] up a space in which “something has to be done.” This is quite different from morality that, on the basis of some dogmatism, insists on telling us what we must and must not do in a given situation of choice. The historical past is “ethical” in that its subject matter (violence, loss, absence, the event, death) arouses in us the kind of ambivalent feelings, about ourselves as well as the “other,” that appear in situations requiring choice and engagement in existentially determining ways.13
And this existentialism, this “humanism” with a performative rather than an essentialist subject—an old topos in White’s work—is also invoked in the cause of permanent openness. Recalling Camus’s having once written that in trying to find out whether or not life had to have a meaning to be lived and his conclusion that “it will be lived all the better if it has no meaning,” White comments that “we might amend the statement to read: it will be lived all the better if it has no single meaning but many different ones.”14
And I think, finally, that radical historians should always wear these kind of sentiments where White has always worn his: openly, explicitly, on his sleeve. White cannot have the last word for radical historians—for his is not the only voice that ought to be heard. But I think he deserves to have the first.
* * *
Now, history as I have presented it here could be seen—from an “orthodox” perspective—as being in pretty bad shape; it’s difficult to imagine how this particular Humpty Dumpty could ever be put together again. At the “top” of my “open” axioms, it has contaminated writers, an object of inquiry they can neither access nor definitively present; it has a referent that is inferred and therefore imagined, which is another way of saying that given that inferences constitute history then history is imagined. Moreover, it has no definitive, shared method; rather, it is a mode of discourse of a rhetorical kind, a product of argumentation and figuration: an aesthetic illusio. In its presentation as narratio history has to have—simply to be a narrative—all the elements common to narrative per se. In other words, it has to be troped and emplotted and sustained by argumentation;
120
KEITH JENKINS
its articulation depends on textual poetics, rhetorical devices and figures, compositional strategies, intertextual readings, variable/contingent theories and methods and personal theses, which are expressed by, and expressive of, the singular circumstances of the author. None of these things are “found” in the past, none are discoverable in the famous “archive,” but these are the conditional elements of any history. This is the way history just is for all of us . . . these are “its necessary conditions of possibility.” And this condition is not denied but accepted willingly and reworked by radical historians. Radical historians like this history; they can live with it, use it, experiment with it, and, insofar as we still need histories at this point in time, direct it towards emancipation and liberation. (By which I mean the making possible of that which is considered impossible; to put an end to consensus.) And of course, radical historians recognize that history (historiography) just is impossible to close down, not just “once and for all,” but at all. A history of this kind—and these are some of its consequences—means the end, surely, of every metanarrative edifice and of all those academic histories of an empirical/epistemologically striving type: toward both of these genres we must have that incredulity Lyotard reserved for metanarratives, as well as working in opposition to all those who would work to prevent what, in the end, radical historians like: the fact that historicizations of the past can be anything you want them to be. This raises, of course, all kinds of dangers; it’s always a risk, always a chance, to exist without something like foundations: some future historicization may well be monstrous. But it’s not, I’m afraid, the case that this is a “risk worth taking” as if it were an option; it’s a risk that is unavoidable: we have come, let’s hope for better rather than worse, to the end of the illusion of the possibility of closure in such a manner that it seems incredible not only that (to reuse one of White’s epigrams again) such histories have been imagined in the past but that they have actually been found. Radical historians hope that—insofar as we might need histories in the future at all, which is not obvious—such absurdities will not be repeated in the future even as farce, and certainly not as tragedy.
Part Two
I now come to what I hope by this point is obviously yet just another rhetorical question: what has all of this got to do with Hayden
Nobody Does It Better 121

White? For the answer is simple: everything. To be sure, in the above argument I have occasionally had in mind influences gleaned from what are by now old favorites, including Karl Marx, Friedrich Nietzsche, R. G. Collingwood, Louis Althusser, Roland Barthes, Michel Foucault, Jean-Franpois Lyotard, Jacques Derrida, Richard Rorty, Ernesto Laclau, Jean Baudrillard, Alain Badiou, and others, as well as midterm or newer ones, such as Frank Ankersmit, Arthur Danto, Elizabeth Ermarth, Judith Butler, Sande Cohen, and Martin Davies, a few of whom I have referenced. But the point is that I “got into” most of these people because of Hayden. By this I don’t mean that he introduced me to or helped me to think better or differently about things, but that he has been involved in my very formation—he figures as the point of departure for my thinking about history; my subsequent journey remains indebted to him. For it was Hayden who, almost single-handedly, turned me from the old Marxist I once was to the post-Marxist I think I may have become, and from the old normal/empirical/modernist historian I was by “training,” into the postmodern person I would like to be. Of course, it’s not his fault, nor anyone else’s, that I have turned out the way I have ... a popularizer of postmodern history . . . and I don’t expect Hayden to necessarily agree with anything I have written under the influence—however attenuated— of his own brilliant writings, including this paper! No. All I am saying is that he occupies a special place in my thinking, and I want to write just two final paragraphs on this.
I first read Hayden’s 1973 text Metahistory in the mid 1970s and I didn’t understand it. I’m ashamed to admit that I neglected him until the early 1980s, when I bought a copy of Tropics of Discourse (1978), after which I went back to Metahistory, rereading it through the later volume of essays. After that, Hayden became my critical guide through the types of history that then constituted the “historical theory” field, a field that, compared to Hayden’s work, seemed thin, myopic, sterile, and, often, just plain dull. Indeed, Hayden’s theorizing—coupled with the fact that he seemed to say everything so unerringly “right” and in a style that was at once so analytically powerful and so memorably epigrammatic (such that looking over his texts now I can hardly read them since they are so underlined and contain so many marginal comments); these texts were so different from anything else I had read that they just seemed to come from nowhere. Accordingly, Hayden’s theorizations became my touchstone, a
122
KEITH JENKINS
way of looking that gained increased momentum with my further reading of his various books and papers as they appeared. I’ve never looked back, nor have I really looked elsewhere; my thinking about Hayden’s texts fused with other reading such that there is a sense in which “reading White” has taken on the mantle of a Badiou-like Event; an immanent, transformative break after which things just never ran the same, and to which I have remained faithful; an act of fidelity to a certain “truth” which, like all fidelities, necessitates reflexive, critical development but which has only served to strengthen my original commitment. Why not say it: Hayden is an intellectual hero of mine.
The final paragraph. When I first read Hayden—over thirty years ago now—I never thought that I would meet him. But over the years— on his occasional visits to London, at various conferences in Europe and England, over the telephone and, more lately, via email, I have got to know him a little. And on every occasion when we have met (even when rebuking me for “falling asleep” while on a panel), he has been unfailingly kind and supportive. A complex mixture of laid-back modesty and forceful assertiveness with more than an edge, a man who doesn’t suffer fools gladly and yet who is incredibly generous to his often far from generous critics (many of whom are very foolish indeed). There is a mo-ment—I relate it somewhat anecdotally—that has stayed in my mind in a way that typifies Hayden for me. When passing through London in 1997, he agreed to an interview. Published in 1998 in a slightly edited form in Literature and History as “A Conversation with Hayden White,” our discussion, which lasted for about three hours, was finally brought to a close when I asked him about criticisms of his work: was he happy to live with them, even the unjust ones? And his reply was as follows:
My attitude about the books and articles I have written is that you write them, you send them out and if people can use the stuff that’s fine. If they want to use it in a distorted form, if they want to adapt it, let them do it. That’s what intellectual work is all about, if they don’t like it, let them reject it, do it better. Collingwood used to say, “I don’t engage in polemics.” He used to say, if you don’t like my ideas do them better. It’s no good getting angry about things, these are ideas which we are trying out in as interesting a way as we can. And I agree with that.15
And I just want to conclude by saying that actually, for me, “nobody does it better . . .”
Nobody Does It Better 123
Notes
1.	Richard Rorty, Contingency, Irony, and Solidarity (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989), 5.
2.	Richard Kearney, States of Mind (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1995), 172.
3.	Ernesto Laclau, Emancipations (London: Verso, 1996'), 123.
4.	Frank Ankersmit, “‘Presence’ and Myth,” History and Theory 45:3 (2006): 328.
5.	Sande Cohen, “The ‘Use and Abuse of History’ According to Jean-Francois Lyotard,” Parallax 6:4 (2000): 100.
6.	Cohen, “The ‘Use and Abuse of History,’” 248—49.
7.	Roland Barthes, “The Discourse of History,” in: The Postmodern History Reader, ed. Keith Jenkins (London: Routledge, 1997), 120—23.
8.	For a brilliant essay on argumentation, see Geoffrey Bennington, “For the Sake of Argument (Up to a Point),” in: Arguing with Derrida, ed. Simon Glen-dinning (Oxford: Blackwell, 2001), 34-56 (with a reply by Derrida).
9.	Carolyn Steedman, Dust. The Archive and Cultural History (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 2001), 153-4.
10.	Jacques Ranciere, The Names of History: On The Poetics of Knowledge (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1992), 63.
11.	Wendy Olmsted, Rhetoric. An Historical Introduction (Oxford: Blackwell, 2006), 1.
12.	Martin L. Davies, Historics (London: Routledge, 2006), 55.
13.	Hayden White, “The Public Relevance of Historical Studies: A Reply to Dirk Moses,” History and Theory 44:3 (2006): 338.
14.	Hayden White, Tropics of Discourse (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1978), 50.
15.	Keith Jenkins, “A Conversation With Hayden White,” Literature and History 7:1 (1998): 82.