04 Franco 2012 "Geometric Abstraction". American Art, 26(2), 34-41. https://doi.org/10.1086/667949

Geometric Abstraction

The New York—Bogotá Nexus

Throughout the 1950s and 1960s, the Colombian artists Edgar Negret and Eduardo
Ramírez-Villamizar were the "grupo de dos" (group of two) who pioneered the development of nonobjective, abstract geometric art in their country.' It was not in Colombia, however, but in New York that they produced the works that would transform the local artistic landscape in Bogotá. This close look at Negret's Magic Machines (1956-63) and
Ramirez-Villamizar's White Reliefs (1959-64) shows how these works were informed by the
Colombians' interaction with contemporary American artists and the extent to which this
transnational dialogue influenced the reception of their work in New York and Bogotá.
My investigation of Negret's and Ramirez Villamizar's work offers insight into an often overlooked aspect of the history of postwar American art. The heroic achievements
of abstract expressionism and the power and clarity of minimalism and pop have long overshadowed contemporaneous artistic developments.2 Yet, to understand the currents that took place after the heyday of abstract expressionism, it is crucial to examine the many positions and the range of experimentation that were available in the late 1950s and early 1960s. Negret's Magic Machines and Ramirez-Villamizar's White Reliefs are revealing
examples from this period that offer a more nuanced vision of the development of postwar American art.

"Cool" Abstraction in New York

Though abstract expressionism attained broad international recognition in the late 1950s
as the most advanced style in American art, at home it had already become academic.
Vanguard American art during the late 1950s and early 1960s was moving away from the highly subjective abstractions of the New York School painters. Rejecting the "hot" gestural drippings and autographic brushstrokes of such artists as Franz Kline, Jackson Pollock, and Willem de Kooning,
artists including Ellsworth Kelly, Jack Youngerman, Kenneth Noland, Frank Stella, and Myron Stout embraced a depersonalized approach to abstraction. These artists shared a preference for lucid and clear design; hard-edged, typically
geometric shapes; and a restricted color palette, often limited to uniform primary colors or monochromes. However, as the art historian Pepe Karmel argues, it would be an oversimplification to treat the transition that occurred in the years 1955-65 as merely an Oedipal scenario in which a younger generation overthrew the principles of its elders. Like the abstract expressionists, these "cool" abstractionists believed that abstraction carried expressive content. Their preference for simplified compositions ties their work to the color-field paintings of Mark Rothko and Barnett Newman, and to the austere black paintings of Ad
Reinhardt, for whom abstraction conveyed transcendental meaning. The "cool" abstractionists combined a "personal sensibility . . . with a seemingly impersonal geometry," which
was "allusive rather than expressionist, understated rather than declarative."

During their time in New York, Negret and Ramirez-Villamizar's artistic community centered on those American artists who gravitated toward the "cool" end of abstraction.

The group, informally known as the Coenties Slip artists (since all had studios in this area of southern Manhattan), included Kelly and Youngerman, whom the Colombian artists had met in Paris in the early 1950s, as well as Robert Indiana and Agnes Martin.5 Another important artist who would inform Negret's and Ramirez-Villamizar's creative processes was the sculptor Louise Nevelson, who became a mentor of sorts for the two young artists. 

Despite stylistic differences, the aesthetic cross-fertilization among members of this loose community is evident in the ordered compositions, limited color palette, and hardedged shapes in their works. During the late 1950s and early 1960s, these artists participated in several exhibitions together, and the paintings and sculptures they showed were interpreted as prime examples of a new approach to abstract art. It was precisely within this context that Negret's and Ramirez-Villamizar's mature work evolved.


Negret's Magic Machines

Negret lived in New York between 1955 and 1963.
There he produced the Magic Machines—freestanding sculptures and wall reliefs in painted metal—as a homage to the city and its dazzling dance of neon lights, traffic signs, ships, skyscrapers, and subway trains. The series also reflected the artist's involvement with the New York
art world: whereas the mechanical dimension of the sculptures parallels the artistic practice of the "cool" abstractionists of the late 1950s, the magical dimension of the series connects them to the aesthetic ideals of the 1940s abstract expressionists.
Negret's seemingly detached and impersonal approach to abstraction is immediately apparent in his use of industrial materials and techniques and the lusterless paints he applied to the Magic Machines. Negret cut and folded aluminum sheets into geometric shapes, assembled them using clearly visible nuts and bolts, and painted the
entire work with matte-finish primary colors. Although his medium is different from that of the Coenties Slip artists, the geometric language and restricted palette of his sculptures parallel the use of the same elements in the paintings of Kelly and Youngerman. In general, Negret's flat, uniform colors, unarticulated, plain surfaces, and controlled compositions were elements favored by all these artists, indicative of a different way of thinking about abstraction, especially when compared with the output of the previous generation.

Negret's sculptural approach bears a close relation to the work of Nevelson. Though the materials and assemblage techniques of the two artists differ, both employed a constructive language. The American sculptor made her signature stacked walls from pieces of wood cut in geometric shapes, painted in matte, monochrome colors, and joined with nails and glue. Both Negret's sculptures and Nevelson's constructions reveal a preference for order and structure, setting their work apart from the spontaneously rendered, often chaotic compositions of the abstract expressionists.

Nevelson and Negret also shared a belief in the magical powers of art. Both sculptors' works display a "cool," ordered kind of abstraction while also emphasizing magic, myth, and spirituality. And for both artists, the magical dimension was derived from their interest in pre-Columbian and Native American art.7 Negret's interest in Navajo and Pueblo ritual artifacts is particularly evident in Kachina, one of the works from the Magic Machines series.

It consists of a vertical tower, with several geometrical protrusions that recall the trunklike body of the Pueblo Kachina dolls and the feathers that sometimes adorn their heads. Like Kachina figures, Negret's sculpture is painted in bright colors—black, blue, and red.

This interest in Native American art echoed that of some members of the abstract expressionist group, such as Adolph Gottlieb, Newman, and Pollock, who sought to establish a special kinship between "primitive" and "modern" man.
For Negret, demonstrating
this kinship was a matter of recognizing the magical aspects of the technological world, and his Magic Machines were meant to accomplish precisely this. According to the artist, the machine was not the product of a rational mind but, rather, a miracle that modern men did not acknowledge as such. As he explained, "I still see the wodd with primitive eyes, I'm not interested in technology as a functional thing, I see i t . . . like a 'miracle.' Yes, I still see
the machine with primitive eyes."'"

The Magic Machines, thus, belong to two apparently contradictory worlds: the mechanical and the magical. This paradoxical nature was discussed by critics in the context of
Negret's first exhibition of these works, at the David Herbert Gallery in New York in 1959. In the introduction to the show's accompanying catalogue. Franklin Königsberg wrote: "Using the idiom of twentieth-century industry, Negret has created fantastic vehicles.

They are man's means to escape this world and penetrate the mysteries beyond. His . . . aluminum constructions are a modern realization of creation's secret harmonies."' i The art critic Lawrence Campbell offered a contrasting but similarly complimentary viewpoint in Art News, describing Negret's work as "a kind of Neolithic art expressing the spirit of the machine age."i
Ramirez-Villamizar's White Reliefs From 1956 to 1964 Ramirez-Villamizar split his time between Bogotá and New York,mand his works from this period are an example of New York artists' rejection of abstract expressionism. Ramirez-Villamizar's white-on-white, hard-edged forms in the White Reliefs series, which are made of painted wooden boards, parallel the work of Nevelson and the
Coenties Slip artists' rejection of abstract expressionism. Additionally, the restrained sensibility of Ramirez-Villamizar's reliefs is charged with a sense of spirituality derived from notions of silence and musicality, which connects him to the aesthetic ideals of Martin. Ramirez-Villamizar's White Reliefs are closely related to Nevelson's Dawn's Wedding Feast oi 1959, her first entirely white environment. The Colombian's use of monochromatic, white-on-white compositions on wood resonates with this work by Nevelson. For both artists, the restricted palette was a means to nullify the expressionist and subjective content associated with color and wood. It was, as the philosopher and art critic Arthur Danto put it, a way to "neutralize the question of color" and "the question of the material" in the service of form.' Their intention, akin to that of the Coenties Slip artists, was to suppress the heated emotional charge of gestural art.

Unlike Nevelson's sculptures, however, Ramirez-
Villamizar's reliefs employ a reduced geometric
vocabulary more akin to that of the "cool" abstractionists.

Circular Relief, for instance, is composed of
two circumscribed circles cut by an asymmetric diagonal. The austere geometric language of this work clearly parallels the aesthetic of hard-edge artists like Kelly or Stout.
The reduced formal vocabulary of Ramirez Villamizar's White Reliefs embodies the artist's seemingly impersonal approach to abstraction. For him, however, this impersonality did not preclude all content or sanction the credo frequently ascribed to Frank Stella—"What you see is what you see."i^ Beyond the muted whiteness and clear shapes, there were silence
and musicality, poetry and mystery.
In this respect, Ramirez-Villamizar's White Reliefs are similar to Martin's "mystical"
paintings of the early 1960s.'5 The two artists shared a belief that art had to convey something
beyond its purely formal or material means, and they linked this idea to notions of silence. But whereas Martin was inspired by Zen Buddhism, Ramírez-Villamizar found a sense of spirituality in pre-Columbian art. As he explained, "If you look at my reliefs, you'll see that they are basically a very clear, quiet surface, like an enveloping
silence. Well, music and sounds burst in the center of them—I learned that [in the pre-
Columbian collection] of the Gold Museum [in Bogotá]."'''
The importance of silence and musicality in the work of Ramírez-Villamizar and Martin
can be linked to John Cage's idea of the "silent mind." According to Cage, his famous concert -^'33" (1952), in which ambient noise was the "sound" of the work, was inspired by Robert Rauschenberg's White Paintings (1951-52), which, although lacking any expressive marks, "were nevertheless animated by the changes of light and shadow that played across their surfaces."'^ Likewise, the whiteness and reduced geometric language of Ramirez-Villamizar's White Reliefs reveal, in his own words, a "rich play of contrasting lights and shadows, silence and musicality" that activate the "poetic mystery" so important for him.is In his 1960 review of Ramirez-Villamizar's White Reliefs exhibition, the art critic Stuart
Preston emphasized the musical or "Mozartian" quality of the works. For him, the austere
geometry of the White Reliefs did not exclude the artist's taste, and he aptly described Ramirez-Villamizar's works as a product of "the pure logic of this artist's sensibility.'''^

New Classicism

During the early 1960s, several exhibitions in New York signaled the arrival of a new style of abstraction exemplified by Negret's Magic Machines and Ramirez-Villamizar's White Reliefs. Increasingly, this new manner was described as a reaction against earlier gestural work and was identified, instead, as belonging to a "classical" tradition.^o New York critics and curators interpreted Negret's and Ramirez-Villamizar's work in precisely these terms. In February 1960, for instance, the David Herbert Gallery organized the exhibition Modern Classicism, which included Negret and Ramirez-Villamizar, alone with the
American artists Josef Albers, Alexander Calder, Kelly, Nevelson, and Leon Polk Smith.

The exhibition aimed to oppose "romantic" and "classical" approaches to abstraction—the
former represented by the then-dominant style of abstract expressionism and the latter exemplified by the newer work in the show. Preston's review in the New York Times confirmed the antagonism "between classicists and romanticists" and reproduced Ramirez-Villamizar's White Relief (I960) as a prime example of the "new classical" art: an art of "simplicity, clarity, balance and repose."^'
Purism, which opened at the same gallery in October 1961, featured a similar roster of artists. This time, however, the curators opted for a less "confining or doctrinaire characterization" of the works included by employing the term "purism" rather than "classicism."

For the exhibition, Negret and Ramirez-Villamizar were called American artists, not Colombian artists living in New York, revealing the extent to which they were considered active participants in that specific community.
Ramirez-Villamizar's inclusion in The Classical Spirit in Twentieth Century Art, held at the Sidney Janis Gallery in 1964, further demonstrates that the Colombians were key proponents of this new trend in abstraction. Moreover, in her review of the exhibitions that featured the latest "classical" movement, the art critic Dore Ashton included Negret and Ramirez-Villamizar's joint show at the Graham Gallery in 1964 and reproduced one of
Negret's sculptures as an example of this tendency.
With the arrival of minimalism by 1964, the term "classicism" rapidly lost validity within New York art circles. Yet the use of the word had significant implications for the history of Colombian art and particularly for the reception of Negret's and Ramirez-Villamizar's work in Bogotá. Local critics, drawing on catalogues and clippings of reviews that the artists sent them from New York, quickly adopted the labels "purism" and "neoclassicism" to describe their works. In this respect, the critical reception of Negret and Ramirez-Villamizar in
Bogotá was determined by their inclusion in international artistic developments and, specifically, in their challenge to the New York School.

As early as 1961 the Bogota-based art critic Marta Traba described Ramirez-Villamizar's
White Reliefs as part of a "heroic trend" in American abstraction called "neoclassicism," which "fearlessly, and in unequal conditions . . . battles against the torrential invasion of Abstract Expressionism." Traba similarly described the Magic Machines as "neoclassical"  in her review of Negret's exhibition at the Biblioteca Luis Ángel Arango in 1962.
By 1964 the presence of a local contingent of the "classical" trend, headed by Negret and Ramírez Villamizar, was already part of the artistic landscape of Colombia. In January ofthat year, for instance, the art critic Walter Engel wrote an article signaling the "revival" of geometric abstraction in the country. Engel did not use the term "neoclassicism,"
preferring the more generic label "geometric
abstraction," and he described this movement as
a response to developments in art in the United
States, in particular, as a reaction against pop.25
Significantly, in March 1964 Negret and Ramírez-
Villamizar organized an exhibition in Bogotá that
echoed the New York shows in which they had
participated. With this effort, they attempted
to assemble an army of Colombian "classicists"
to stand against the excesses of the country's
"romantic" art, which they identified at the time
with the figurative painting of Fernando Botero.
Earlier in 1964 Botero had won first prize at the
Intercol Salon of Young Artists for his painting Las
Erutas {The Eruits), and his latest works were exhibited at the recently opened Museo de Arte Moderno (Museum of Modern Art) in Bogotá.
In an interview after receiving the prize. Botero made the controversial statement that abstract art was nothing more than "mere decoration, easy decoration." Upset by Botero's statement and his "deformed" figures, Negret and Ramírez-Villamizar, together with the artist Omar Rayo and the graphic designer David Consuegra, organized the exhibition Neoclásicos (Neoclassicists) at the Galería 25 in Bogotá as an attempt to counteract the effects of Botero's "romanticizing" painting.

This exhibition paralleled the battle that had been fought in New York just a few years earlier. In Colombia, however, the offensive was not directed at gestural, expressionist abstraction but at current local developments in painting. Ramírez-Villamizar and Negret effectively co-opted the debates surrounding abstract art that had recently taken place in New York, translating them to the local context as a means of countering Botero's figurative art. Ultimately, they failed to stem Botero's fast-growing influence. Throughout the
1960s, a younger generation of artists (including Beatriz González, Santiago Cárdenas, and Luis Caballero) pursued figuration rather than nonobjectivity, producing various styles of painting attuned to pop art. Negret's and Ramirez-Villamizar's abstractions were, nevertheless,
significant within Bogota's art world because, in presenting an alternative aesthetic model, they promoted a sense of openness and internationalism in Colombian modern art.

Copyright of American Art is the property of University of Chicago Press and its content may not be copied or
emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission.
However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.