The Creative Power of Nonhuman Photography
JOANNA ZYLINSKA

Abstract
Living in the media-saturated society of the 21st century has become
tantamount to being photographed on a constant basis. Our identity is
constituted and confirmed by the ongoing flow of photo streams on our
mobile phones, tablets and social media platforms such as Facebook and
Tumblr, not to mention the thousands of security cameras invisibly
registering our image when we pass through city centres, shopping malls
and airports. This photographic process is largely automatized: it is subject
to the logic and vision of the machine. Even the supposed human-centric
decisions with regard to what to photograph and how to do it are often
reactions to events quickly unfolding in front of the photographer’s eyes, or
responses to pre-established visual categories: landscape, portraiture, play,
war. This chapter argues that human-driven photography – involving an act
of conscious looking through a viewfinder or at an LCD screen – is only one
small part of what takes place in the field of photography, even though it is
often made to stand in for photography as such. Yet, rather than contribute
to recent jeremiads about photography – what with it being seen as
supposedly dying in the digital era because it is no longer authentic or
material enough, or imploding due to its excessiveness and banality as
evidenced on Instagram and in the much maligned selfie phenomenon – it
also suggests that it is precisely through focusing on its nonhuman aspect
that we can find life in photography.

132

The Creative Power of Nonhuman Photography

Images 1–4 (from above left). Joanna Zylinska, from the series Topia daedala, 2014.

133

The Creative Power of Nonhuman Photography

Photography as philosophy
This article offers a philosophical exposition of the concept of ‘nonhuman
photography’. What is meant by nonhuman photography here is not just
photos taken by agents that are not human, such as CCTV cameras, body
scanners, space satellites or Google Street View, although some of these
examples will be referenced throughout the piece. Yet the principal aim of
this article is to suggest that there is more to photography than meets the
(human) eye and that all photography is to some extent nonhuman. With
this, no doubt still somewhat cryptic, proposition in mind, let us take a
small detour from philosophising to look at a photographic project which
introduces the key ideas behind this article.
Called Topia daedala (Images 1–4), this series of twelve black and white
photographs225 arises out of an ongoing exploration on my part of various
forms of manufactured landscape. Taken from two vantage points on both
sides of a window, the composite images that make up the series interweave
human and nonhuman creativity by overlaying the outer world of cloud
formation with the inner space of sculptural arrangement. Remediating the
tradition of the sublime as embraced by J.M.W. Turner’s landscape
paintings and Ansel Adams’ national park photographs, the series
foregrounds the inherent manufacturedness of what counts as ‘landscape’
and of the conventions of its visual representation. Through this, Topia
daedala performs a micro-sublime for the Anthropocene era, a period in
which the human has become identified as a geological agent whose impact
on the geo- and biosphere has been irreversible. It also raises questions on
the role of plastic – as both construction material and debris – in the age of
petrochemical urgency.
Topia daedala is not meant to serve as a direct illustration of the concept
of nonhuman photography this article engages with. However, it does
introduce us to a wider problematic of human-nonhuman relations, raising
at the same time the politico-ethical question about our human
responsibility in the world in which the agency of the majority of actants –
such as wind, rain or earthquake – goes beyond that of human decision or
will, even if it may be influenced by human action. The question of human
responsibility in the universe which is quintessentially entangled, on both a
cellular and cosmic level (with us all being ‘made of starstuff’),226 is an
important one. Even if we cannot be entirely sure what this fragile human
‘we’ actually stands for, the responsibility to face, and give an account of,
the unfoldings of this world – which is made up of human and nonhuman
entities and relations – belongs to us humans in a singular way.
Philosophy, in particular ethics, has typically been a way of addressing the

This series was developed as a visual track for my book, Minimal Ethics for
the Anthropocene.
226 This is a famous line by physicist Carl Sagan from his documentary TV series,
Cosmos.
225

134	  

The Creative Power of Nonhuman Photography

problem of responsibility.227 But written linear argument is only one mode
of enquiry through which this problem can be approached. Alongside
philosophical writing, over the recent years I have been attempting to
experiment with other, less verbal, modes of addressing ethical and political
issues: those enabled by art, and, more specifically, photography. These
experiments have been driven by one overarching question: is it possible to
practice philosophy as a form of art, while also engaging in art-making
and photography as ways of philosophising? The reason photography may
lend itself to this kind of cross-modal experimentation is because of its
ontological, or world-making (rather than just representational),
capabilities. We can turn here for support to literary critic Walter Benn
Michaels, who, while upholding ‘the impossibility (and the undesirability)
of simply denying the indexicality of the photograph’,228 also argues that ‘It
is precisely because there are ways in which photographs are not just
representations that photography and the theory of photography have been
so important’. 229 My proposition about photography’s ontological
capabilities entails a stronger claim than the one made by Michael Fried in
the Conclusion to his book, Why Photography Matters as Art as Never
Before, in which photography as practiced by representatives of what Fried
calls ‘the anti-theatrical tradition’ such as Jeff Wall, Thomas Struth or
Berndt and Hilda Becher is positioned as ‘an ontological medium’, because
it ‘makes a positive contribution’ to ontological thought via its engagement
with issues such as absorption and worldhood. 230 While for Fried
photography just makes philosophy better, my claim in this article is that
photography makes philosophy, full stop – and also, more importantly,
that photography makes worldhood, rather than just commenting on it.
It may seem at this point that what was meant to be an account of
nonhuman photography is revealing itself to be quite strongly attached to
the concept of the human – as philosopher, photographer or art critic. This
is true, because there is nothing more humanist than any unexamined
singular gesture of trying to ‘move on beyond the human’. My ambition
here, as in my other work, is therefore to explore the possibility of
continuing to work with the concept of the human in the light the

In my books Minimal Ethics for the Anthropocene (Open Humanities Press,
Ann Arbor, 2014), Bioethics in the Age of New Media (MIT Press, Cambridge,
2009) and The Ethics of Cultural Studies (Continuum, London and New York,
2005) I explored this question of responsibility by taking some steps towards
outlining a non-prescriptive, non-moralistic, content-free ethics.
228 W B Michaels, ‘Photographs and Fossils’, in Photography Theory, J Elkin
(ed.), Routledge, New York and London, 2007, p. 447.
229 Michaels, p. 445.
230 M Fried, Why Photography Matters as Art as Never Before, Yale University
Press, New Haven, 2008, p. 347.
227

135

The Creative Power of Nonhuman Photography

posthumanist critique,231 taking the latter seriously as both an injunction
and a set of possibilities. The reasons for this proposed retention of the
human have nothing to do with any kind of residual humanism or species
nostalgia. Instead, they spring from the recognition of a strategic role of the
concept of the human in any kind of artistic, creative, political or ethical
project worth its salt, while also remaining aware of the fact that in many
works of recent posthumanist theory the human has been successfully
exposed as nothing more than a fantasy of unity and selfhood. This fantasy
has been premised on the exclusion of the human’s dependency, both
material and conceptual, on other beings and non-living entities. Seen as
too Eurocentric and masculinist by postcolonial and feminist theory, the
human has also been revealed by various sciences to be just an arbitrary cut
off point in the line of species continuity on the basis of characteristics
shared across the species barrier: communication, emotions or tool use.
This (non- or posthumanist) human this article retains as the anchor point
of its enquiry is thus premised on the realisation that we are in
(philosophical) trouble as soon as we start speaking about the human, but it
also shows a certain intransigence that makes (some of) us hang on to the
vestiges of the concept that has structured our thinking, philosophy and art
for many centuries. So, onto a posthumanist theory of nonhuman
photography, as articulated by a human, all too human, philosopherphotographer…

Towards nonhuman photography (and all the way back)
By way of contextualising our discussion of nonhuman photography, I want
to look at two important texts in photography theory in which the
relationship between human and nonhuman agents, technologies and
practices has been addressed explicitly: a 2008 essay by John Tagg titled
‘Mindless Photography’ and a 2009 book by Fred Ritchin titled After
Photography. Tagg’s essay is a commentary on the supposed withering of
the critical paradigm in both photographic practice and its interpretation, a
paradigm articulated by Victor Burgin in his 1984 seminal text Thinking
Photography and subsequently adopted by many scholars and students of
photography. In his article Tagg references two then recent phenomena
which, in his view, had radically altered the relationship between
photography and the human: the CCTV system introduced in 2003 to
Although the tradition of posthumanist critique in the humanities extends as
far back as at least the work of Charles Darwin and Sigmund Freud, and includes
writings by authors such as Michel Foucault, Jacques Derrida and Donna
Haraway, some of the recent key texts that critically expound the concept of
posthumanism include: N. Katherine Hayles, How We Became Posthuman:
Virtual Bodies in Cybernetics, Literature, and Informatics, University of Chicago
Press, Chicago, 1999; Cary Wolfe, What Is Posthumanism?, University of
Minnesota Press, 2009; Rosi Braidotti, The Posthuman, Polity, Cambridge, 2013;
and Stefan Herbrechter, Posthumanism: A Critical Analysis, Bloomsbury,
London, 2013.

231

136

The Creative Power of Nonhuman Photography

monitor the implementation of congestion charge in central London and
the visual rendering of data captured by a radio telescope, in June 2005, of
solar dust cloud radiation in the Taurus Molecular Cloud, with the data
representing an event that ‘took place in 1585, or thereabouts’.232 While in
the 1970s and early 1980s ‘photography was framed as a site of human
meanings that called the human into place’, the more recent developments
cited by Tagg are said to have undermined ‘this confident assumption’.233
Tagg seems disturbed by the fact that, in the London traffic surveillance
system, the relationship between the embodied human subject and the
technical apparatus has been irrevocably broken, with the technological
circuit which consists of ‘cameras, records, files and computers’234 doing
away with visual presentation, ‘communication, psychic investment, a
subject, or even a bodily organ’235 – until the visual data concerning the car
with a given number plate that has missed the congestion charge payment
reaches the court. Tagg is similarly troubled by the severance of the
relationship between photography and human sensation, between stimulus
and response, in space photography. He goes so far as to suggest that in
those new technological developments
photography loses its function as a representation of the ego and
the eye and even as a pleasure machine built to excite the body. In
place of those figures, photography is encountered as an utterly
dead thing; mindless in a much blunter sense than imagined [by
Burgin] twenty-five years ago… [It is] driving towards a systemic
disembodiment that, accelerating in the technologies of
cybernetics and informatics, has sought to prepare what has been
hailed as the ‘postbiological’ or ‘posthuman’ body for its insertions
into a new machinic enslavement.236
Photography which is unable to provide stimulation and pleasure for the
human is then immediately linked by Tagg with mindlessness, emptiness
and, ultimately, death. It may seem that, with this articulation, Tagg is
engaging in a belated attempt to rescue photography from its long-standing
association with mortality established by canonical texts such as Roland
Barthes’ Camera Lucida, and to retrospectively postulate the possibility of
photography acting as a life-giving force. However, this no doubt radical
possibility, briefly hinted at in the above cited passage, is immediately
withdrawn. Photography does not deliver life to the human any more and,
for Tagg, it is only the human that can be both life’s subject and its arbiter.
This is of course a familiar philosophical gesture, first enacted by Aristotle,
J Tagg, ‘Mindless Photography’, in Photography: Theoretical Snapshots, J J
Long, A Noble and E Welch (eds), Routledge, London and New York, 2008, p.
21.
233 Ibid., p. 24.
234 Ibid., p. 19.
235 Ibid., p. 21.
236 Ibid., p. 25.
232

137

The Creative Power of Nonhuman Photography

whereby technology is reduced to a mere tool for human existence, survival
or improvement and is then assessed on the basis of how well it performs
this function (rather than being understood as a dynamic network of forces
the way Michel Foucault and Bernard Stiegler respectively suggest, or as an
‘intrinsic correlation of functions’237 between the human and the apparatus
the way Vilém Flusser apprehends it). Conceived in these instrumental
terms, as the human’s opponent and enemy – and not part of the originary
techno-logic that brings forth the human in the world, and the world itself
as a space occupied by human and nonhuman entities – photography must
inevitably fail.
It would be unfair not to mention the political motivation that underpins
Tagg’s argument. His concern with ‘machinic enslavement’ is driven by
what he sees as the deprivation of the human subject of both corporeal
integrity and political subjectivity as a result of the encroachment of those
new photoimaging technologies, in which ‘there is nothing to be seen’, on
our lives.238 This concern no doubt becomes even more pressing in the era
of global networked surveillance enacted by the likes of the NSA, GCHQ,
Facebook and Google. Yet to blame photography for the immoral and
inhumane actions of its users is to misidentify the enemy, while also
weakening the power of a political critique developed in its ambit. In his
essay Tagg takes some significant steps towards analysing the changes
occurring to photographic practice at the beginning of the twenty-first
century but then recoils in horror from the brink of his own analysis. What
could have served as a stepping stone towards developing both a radical
posthumanist photography theory and a radical posthumanist political
analysis ends up retreating into a place of melancholia for the human of
yesteryear, one who was supposedly in control of both his personal body
and the body politic but who can now only tilt at windmills – which are
turning into drones in front of his very eyes.
If only Tagg had allowed himself to hear the exhortation from another
photography theory radical, Fred Ritchin! Admittedly, Ritchin’s work is not
free from a sense of melancholia espoused by Tagg: in After Photography
Ritchin clearly reveals how he misses the time when people believed in
images and when images could be used to solve conflict and serve justice.
Yet, even though his book opens up with a rather dispiriting account of the
changes occurring to the photographic medium and its representationalist
ambitions, it ends with an affirmation of life in photography. Dazzled by
the horizon of scale opened by telescopy and physics in a similar way Tagg
was, Ritchin nevertheless admits that ‘in the digital-quantum world, it
might be just possible … to use an emerging post-photography to delineate,
document, and explore the posthuman. To dance with ambiguity. To

Cited from a letter written by Flusser in S Zielinski, [… After the Media],
Univocal, Minneapolis, 2013, p. 114. Zielinski explains that, for Flusser, ‘the
apparatus does what the human wants it to do, and the human can only want
what the apparatus is able to do’, p. 114.
238 Tagg, p. 24.
237

138

The Creative Power of Nonhuman Photography

introduce humility to the observer, as well as a sense of belonging. To say
yes, and simultaneously, no’.239

(Always) nonhuman photography
It is precisely in this critical-philosophical spirit, of saying yes and,
simultaneously, no, that my opening proposition that all photography is to
some extent nonhuman should be read. While I am aware of, and
concerned with, ways in which the nonhuman aspect of photography can
produce inhumane practices, I also want to suggest that it is precisely in its
nonhuman aspect that photography’s creative, or world-making, side can be
identified. Therefore, rather than contribute to recent jeremiads about
photography, what with it being seen as supposedly dying in the digital era
because it is no longer authentic or material enough, or imploding due to its
excessiveness and banality as evidenced on Instagram and in the much
maligned selfie phenomenon, I want to argue in what follows that it is
precisely through focusing on its nonhuman aspect that we can find life in
photography. This line of argument is partly indebted to the work of
Flusser, who, in Towards a Philosophy of Photography writes: ‘The
photographic apparatus lies in wait for photography; it sharpens its teeth in
readiness. This readiness to spring into action on the part of apparatuses,
their similarity to wild animals, is something to grasp hold of in the attempt
to define the term etymologically’. 240 Flusser builds here on the Latin
origins of the term ‘apparatus’, which derives from apparare, ‘make ready
for’ (as a combination of the prefix ad-, ‘toward’, and parare, ‘make ready’).
This leads him to read photography as facilitated by, or even protoinscribed in, the nexus of image-capture devices, various chemical and
electronic components and processes, as well as sight- and technologyequipped humans.
Flusser’s proposition challenges the humanist narrative of invention as an
outcome of singular human genius: it recognises the significance of the
technological set-up in the emergence of various human practices. This is
not to say that these practices function outside the human but rather that
the concepts of self-contained human intentionality and sovereign human
agency may be too limited to describe the emergence of specific
technological processes at a particular moment in time. Flusser’s idea
seems to be (unwittingly) reflected in Geoffrey Batchen’s proposition
outlined in Burning with Desire that photography was invented –
seemingly repeatedly, by Nicéphore Niépce, Louis Daguerre, Hyppolyte
Bayard and William Fox Talbot, among others – due to the fact that in the
early nineteenth century there already existed a desire for it. This desire
F Ritchin, After Photography, W. W. Norton & Company, New York, 2009, p.
183.
240 V Flusser, Towards a Philosophy of Photography, Reaktion Books, London,
2000, pp. 21-22.
239

139

The Creative Power of Nonhuman Photography

manifested itself in the proliferation of the discourses and ideas about the
possibility of capturing images and fixing them, and of the technologies –
‘the camera obscura and the chemistry necessary to reproduce’ 241 the
images taken with it – that would facilitate such a development. We could
therefore perhaps go so far as to say that the photographic apparatus, which
for Batchen contains but also exceeds a discrete human component, was
awaiting the very invention of photography.
The above discussed ideas on the photographic apparatus will eventually
point me not just towards rethinking the photographic medium but also
towards a possibility (one that has been withheld by Tagg) of a
posthumanist political analysis. For now, taking inspiration from Flusser, I
want to suggest that human-driven photography – where an act of
conscious looking through a viewfinder or, more frequently nowadays, at an
LCD screen held at arm’s level – is only one small part of what goes on in
the field of photography, even though it is often made to stand in for
photography as such. The execution of human agency in photographic
practice, be it professional or amateur, ostensibly manifests itself in
decisions about the subject matter (the ‘what’) and about ways of capturing
this subject matter with a digital or analogue apparatus (the ‘how’). Yet in
amateur, snapshot-type photography these supposed human-centric
decisions are often affective reactions to events quickly unfolding in front of
the photographer’s eyes. Such reactions happen too quickly, or we could
even say automatically, for any conscious processes of decision-making to
be involved – bar that original decision to actually have, bring and use a
camera, rather than not. This automatism in photography also manifests
itself in the fact that these kinds of ‘snap’ reactions are usually rechanneled
through a whole database of standardised, pre-programmed, pre-existing
image-frames, whose significance we are already familiar with and which
we are trying to recreate in a unique way, under the umbrella of so-called
individual experience: ‘toddler running towards mother’; ‘girl blowing a
candle on a birthday cake’; ‘couple posing in front of the Taj Mahal’. It is in
this sense that, as Flusser has it, ‘weddings conform to a photographic
program’.242
Similar representationalist ambitions accompany many professional
photographic activities, including those undertaken by photojournalists
who aim to show us, objectively and without judging, what war, poverty and
‘the pain of others’, to borrow Susan Sontag’s phrase,243 are ‘really’ like, or
those performed by photographic artists. Even prior to any moment of
making a picture actually occur, fine art photographers tend to remain
invested in the modernist idea of an artist as a human agent with a

G Batchen, Burning with Desire: The Conception of Photography, MIT Press,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1999, p. 25.
242 V Flusser, Into the Universe of Technical Images, University of Minnesota
Press, Minneapolis, 2001, p. 56.
243 See S Sontag, Regarding the Pain of Others, Picador, New York, 2003.
241

140

The Creative Power of Nonhuman Photography

particular vocation, one whose aesthetic and conceptual gestures are aimed
at capturing something unique, or at least capturing it uniquely, with an
image-making device. And thus we get works of formal portraiture; images
of different types of vegetation or geological formations that are made to
constitute ‘landscapes’; still-life projects of aestheticised domesticity,
including close-ups of kitchen utensils, fraying carpets or light traces on a
wall; and, last but not least, all those works that can be gathered into that
rag-bag called ‘conceptual photography’.244 In this way, images inscribe
themselves in a cybernetic loop of familiarity, with minor variations to style,
colour and the (re)presented object made to stand for creativity, originality
or even ‘genius’.

The automated image
Through the decisions of artists and amateurs about their practice,
photography becomes an act of making something significant, even if not
necessarily making it signify something in any straightforward way. It is a
practice of focusing on what is in its very nature multifocal, of literally
casting light on what would have otherwise remained obscure, of carving a
fragment from the flow of life and turning it into a splinter of what, postfactum, becomes known as ‘reality’. Traditionally, this moment of selection
– referred to as ‘decisive’ by followers of the documentary tradition in
photography – was associated with the pressing of the button to open the
camera’s shutter. However, with the introduction of the Lytro camera on to
the market in 2012, the temporality of this seemingly unique and transient
photographic moment has been stretched into both the past and the future.
Lytro captures the entire light field rather than a single plane of light, thus
allowing the photographer to change and readjust the focus on a computer
in postproduction. Interestingly, Lytro is advertised as ‘The only camera
that captures life in living pictures’ – a poetic formulation which is
underpinned by the ongoing industry claim to ‘absolute novelty’, but which
merely exacerbates and visualises the inherent instability of all
photographic practice and all photographic objects. Lytro is thus just one
more element in the long-term humanist narrative about ‘man’s dominion
over the earth’, a narrative that drives the progressive automatisation of
many of our everyday devices, including cameras, cars and refrigerators.
There are of course many ways of systematising art photography, with
additional categories and subcategories – such as ‘abstraction’, ‘architecture’ or
‘nude’ – being frequently listed. The quick typology proposed here does not aim
to be comprehensive or scholarly: rather, my aim is to highlight the traditional
categories frequently used by professional fine art photography exhibition and
competitions, as well as amateur artist photo hosting sites. The last category,
‘conceptual photography’, is perhaps the most open and the most contentious. I
am using the term here in the expanded sense it has gained on many art
photography websites. To cite from one of them, Fotoblur (www.fotoblur.com),
conceptual photography is a ‘genre of photography in which the artist makes a
photograph of a concept or idea’.

244

141

The Creative Power of Nonhuman Photography

Giving us an illusion of control over technology by making cameras smaller
and domestic equipment more user-friendly, the technoscientific industry
actually exacerbates the gap between technology and the human by
relieving us from the responsibility of getting to know and engage with the
increasingly software-driven ‘black boxes’.

Image 5. An example from Véronique Ducharme's series Encounters consisting of images
taken by automatic hunting cameras.

In the light of the dominance of the humanist paradigm in photography, a
paradigm that is premised on the supposed human control of both the
practice of image-making and the equipment, it is important to ask what
gets elided in such conceptualisations. Of course, I am not the only one who
is asking this question: the problem of nonhuman agency in photography
has been explored by other theorists, artists and curators. One recent
photography event that brought many of these ideas to the fore was
Drone: The Automated Image, a series of shows taking place under the
umbrella of the photography biennale Le Mois de la Photo in Montreal,
curated by Paul Wombell, in 2013.245 The uniqueness of this 13th edition of
the Montreal biennale lay not so much in highlighting the machinic aspect
of photographic and video practice, as this aspect had already been
mobilised in the early days of photography – for example, in the works of
Alexander Rodchenko or László Moholy-Nagy. Drone: The Automated
This article arises out of a catalogue essay I wrote for this exhibition: J
Zylinska, ‘All the World’s a Camera: Notes on Nonhuman Photography’, in
Drone: The Automated Image, Paul Wombell (ed.), Kerber, Bielefeld, 2013.

245

142

The Creative Power of Nonhuman Photography

Image (which was concerned with much more than just drones) took one
step further on this road towards not just nonhuman but also posthumanist
photography by actually departing from the human-centric visualisation
process. In many of the works shown, the very act and process of capture
were relegated to a computer, a camera mounted atop a moving vehicle, a
robot or a dog. To mention just one example, Canadian artist Véronique
Ducharme presented a photography-based installation called Encounters,
consisting of images taken by automatic hunting cameras (Image 5). As the
artist herself explains,
Over the course of one year, automatic cameras, installed in
various parts of the Quebec landscape, recorded images from the
forest. The images included animals, sunrise, wind and other
actants susceptible of triggering the shutter of the cameras. These
digital images, including the ‘mistakes’ of the cameras (i.e.,
blacked-out or overexposed images) were then transferred onto
slide film in order to be projected in the gallery space using slide
projectors. Accompanied by its rhythmic mechanical click, each
machine has been programmed to sporadically and
unpredictably project the images around the space, leaving the
viewer entangled within the dialogue created by the machines
and the images.246
Ducharme’s project offers a thought-provoking intervention into the debate
about (human) intentionality in photography theory, whereby the former is
seen as a condition and a guarantee of the medium being considered a form
of art.247 Photographic agency is distributed here amongst a network of
participants, which includes not just nonhuman but also inanimate actors –
even if ‘the beholder’ of the installation is still envisaged to be a human
gallery-goer.
Ducharme’s work has similarities with another project which foregrounds
and remediates nonhuman photographic agency without reneging on its
human dimension: Stolen Images by British photographer Juliet Ferguson
(Image 6), published in the London independent photography magazine
Flip in 2012 and online in Photomediations Machine in 2013. Accessing
CCTV cameras using appropriate search terms via Google as part of her
journalism job, Ferguson was able ‘to see through the all-seeing eyes of the
CCTV camera places’248 what she would not have access to in the real world
– without leaving her sofa. The process led her to reflect ‘on what it means
to take a photograph’ and to pose the following questions: ‘The majority of

V Ducharme, Encounters, 15.02.2014, Photomediations Machine,
http://photomediationsmachine.net/2014/02/15/encounters/
247 For the exposition of this argument, developed in response to the work of
Michael Fried on the work of Thomas Demand, see Michaels, pp. 443-44.
248 J Ferguson, Stolen Images, 29.04.2013, Photomediations Machine,
http://photomediationsmachine.net/2013/04/29/stolen-images
246

143

The Creative Power of Nonhuman Photography

the cameras I used I could pan, zoom and focus. Is this any less
photography than someone using a fully automatic camera and taking a
picture from a designated panorama point at a beauty spot? Does
photography demand a presence or are photographs taken using
appropriated cameras controlled from another country in another time
zone just as valid as “created” images?’.249 Ferguson has revealed that, in
the process, she began ‘to see a certain beauty in the images as they became
removed from their original intention of surveillance. Instead, they offered
a unique perspective on the ebb and flow of a day, from a vantage point and
rigidity that ordinary photography doesn’t offer’.250

Image 6. An example from Juliet Ferguson's series Stolen Images created with CCTV
cameras.

The photographic condition
These two projects discussed above demonstrate that art practice is merely
part of a wider photographic condition, with things photographing
themselves, without always being brought back to the human spectrum of
vision as the ultimate channel of perception and of things perceived.
Naturally, humans form part of this photographic continuum – as artists,
photojournalists, festival organisers, computer programmers, engineers,
printers, Instagram users, and, last but not least, spectators. However, what
the examples just presented make explicit is that we are all part of that
photographic flow of things being incessantly photographed, and of trying
to make interventions from within the midst of it. In this way, Ducharme’s
and Ferguson’s projects fall into a category that we might term
‘insignificant photography’ – not in the sense that they are mindless (as
Tagg would perhaps have it), irrelevant and of no consequence, but rather
249
250

Ibid.
Ibid.

144

The Creative Power of Nonhuman Photography

in the sense of allowing us to see things that have been captured almost
incidentally and in passing, with the thematic ‘what’ not being the key
impulse behind the execution of the images. It is worth emphasising that
this idea of insignificant photography has not just come to the fore with the
development of networked digital technologies but was actually present in
the early discourse of photography, even if the latter tended to confine
photography’s nonhuman aspect to the fairly conservative idea of ‘objective
observation’. Steve Edwards explains that
Throughout its history, the camera has repeatedly been seen as
an objective machine that captures information without any
interference from the artist. … in the early years of photography
this was an often repeated theme: it was assumed that the sun
made the picture, or the camera did, or even that the object in
question depicted itself (Talbot spoke of his country pile, Lacock
Abbey, as the first building ‘that was ever yet known to have
drawn its own picture’).251
The separation between the mechanism of photography as ‘objective
observation’ and the human-centric notion of the ‘intentionality’ of the
photographer has been used as a disciplinary device in art history: as
signalled before, the elevation of photography to the status of art has been
premised upon it. 252 It is this separation that the work of many
contemporary photographers such as Ducharme and Ferguson troubles to a
significant extent.
So what is meant by this notion of photographic condition, and does the
postulation of its existence stand up to philosophical and experiential
scrutiny? To explore these questions, let us start from a very simple
proposition: there is life in photography. If living in the so-called media age
has become tantamount to being photographed on a permanent basis, with
our identity constituted and verified by the ongoing development of our
photo galleries and photo streams on mobile phones, tablets and social
media platforms such as Facebook, Tumblr and Pinterest, not to mention
the thousands of security cameras quietly and often invisibly registering our
image when we pass through city centres, shopping malls and airports,
then, contrary to its more typical Barthesian association with the passage of
time and death, photography can be understood more productively as a lifemaking process. As Sarah Kember and I argue in Life after New Media, it is
‘precisely in its efforts to arrest duration, to capture or still the flow of life –
beyond singular photographs’ success or failure at representing this or that
referent – that photography’s vital forces are activated’.253 Photography
S Edwards, Photography: A Very Short Introduction, Oxford University Press,
Oxford, 2006, p. 19.
252 Fried’s Why Photography Matters as Art as Never Before espouses this point
of view.
253 S Kember and J Zylinska, Life After New Media: Mediation as a Vital Process,
MIT Press, Cambridge, 2012, p. 72.
251

145

The Creative Power of Nonhuman Photography

lends itself to being understood in a critical vitalist framework due to its
positioning in a network of dynamic relations between present and past,
movement and stasis, flow and cut. In making cuts into duration, in
stabilising the temporal flow into entities, photography is inherently
involved with time. Significantly, for vitalist philosophers such as Henri
Bergson and Gilles Deleuze, time, duration and movement stand precisely
for life itself. As Bergson provocatively asks, ‘But is it not obvious that the
photograph, if photograph there be, is already taken, already developed in
the very heart of things and at all the points of space?’.254 Photography’s
proximity to life is therefore revealed in its temporal aspect, which is
enacted in photography’s dual ontology, whereby it can be seen as both
object and practice, as both snapshot and all the other virtual snapshots
that could have potentially been there, and, last but not least, as both being
something here and now and as something always unfolding into something
else. It is also in this dual ontology that the nonhuman side of photography
comes to the fore, enacted as it is through agents as diverse as CCTV, aerial
camera systems, satellites, endoscopy equipment and webcams as well as
camera and mobile-phone-sporting humans. It is perhaps worth making a
quick reservation here that, to acknowledge the life-making aspect of
photography is not necessarily to condone the politically suspicious yet
increasingly widespread technologies of ubiquitous surveillance, control
and loss of privacy enabled by various kinds of cameras. However, much
has already been written about the latter, with little acknowledgement so
far of the vital potentiality of photography – which, in an ontological sense,
does not have to be agent of control, even if it often is. There is therefore a
danger of moralising photography in academic and public discourses before
its potential has been truly explored. The foregrounding of the inherently
creative power of photography as a practice is part of the philosophical
argument of this article, although issues of politics never disappear from its
agenda.

Photography and life
The on-off activity of the photographic process, which carves life into
fragments while simultaneously reconnecting them to the imagistic flow,
may allow us to conclude not only that there is life in photography, but also
that life itself is photographic. Interestingly, Claire Colebrook explains this
process of creative becoming in and of life by drawing on the very concept
of image production, or ‘imaging’. She writes: ‘All life, according to Bergson
and to Deleuze after him, can be considered as a form of perception or
“imaging” where there is not one being that apprehends or represents
another being, but two vectors of creativity where one potential for
differentiation encounters another and from that potential forms a
H Bergson, Matter and Memory, George Allen & Unwinn Ltd., London, 1911,
p. 31.

254

146

The Creative Power of Nonhuman Photography

relatively stable tendency or manner’.255 This idea has its root in Bergson’s
Matter and Memory, where our experience of the world, which is always a
way of sensing the world, comes in the form of images. We should mention
here that, on the whole, Bergson is somewhat hesitant about the role played
by images in cognition: in Creative Evolution he dismisses them as mere
‘snapshots’ of perception, post-factum reductions of duration and time to a
sequence of the latter’s frozen slices.256 It may therefore seem strange to be
revisiting the work of a philosopher who only used the concept of
photography negatively, to outline a ‘better’, i.e. more intuitive and more
fluid, mode of perception and cognition, in an attempt to say something
new about photography. However, my argument here, as in my previous
work,257 is that Bergson’s error is first and foremost media-specific and not
philosophical per se: namely, he misunderstands photography’s inherently
creative and dynamic power by reducing it to a sequence of already
fossilised artefacts, with the mind fragmenting the world into a sequence of
‘snapshots’. This is why I want to suggest that, its mystical underpinnings
aside, we can mobilise Bergson’s philosophical writings on duration
understood as a manifestation of élan vital to rethink photography as a
quintessential practice of life. Indeed, photography is one possible (and
historically specific) enactment of the creative practice of imaging, with the
cuts into duration it makes always remaining connected to the flow of time.
If we accept the fact that cutting – be it with our visual or conceptual
apparatus – is inevitable to the processes of making sense of the world, then
we can see any outcomes of the photographic cut, i.e. photographs and
other products of the image-making process, as temporary stabilisations of
the flow of duration that still bear a trace of life – rather than as frozen and
ultimately deadly mementoes of the past. It is important to point out that,
in order to recognise any kind of process as a process, we need to see it
against the concept of a temporary stabilisation, interruption or cut into
this process. A photograph is one possible form such stabilisations take,
and a rather ubiquitous one at that. It is precisely because of its ubiquity
and its increasingly intuitive technological apparatus that it serves as a

C Colebrook, Deleuze and the Meaning of Life, Continuum, London and New
York, 2010, p. 11.
256 Bemoaning our suppression of intuition – which can offer us a more accurate
and less fragmented picture of the world – Bergson highlights our overreliance on
the intellect in the cognitive process: "Instead of attaching ourselves to the inner
becoming of things, we place ourselves outside them in order to recompose their
becoming artificially. We take snapshots, as it were, of the passing reality, and,
as these are characteristic of the reality, we have only to string them on a
becoming, abstract, uniform and invisible, situated at the back of the apparatus of
knowledge, in order to imitate what there is that is characteristic in this becoming
itself. Perception, intellection, language so proceed in general. Whether we
would think becoming, or express it, or even perceive it, we hardly do anything
else than set going a kind of cinematograph inside us." [H Bergson, Creative
Evolution, Random House, The Modern Library, New York, 1944 (first published
in 1911), p. 362.]
257 This section develops some of the ideas discussed in chapter 3 of Kember
and Zylinska, Life After New Media.
255

147

The Creative Power of Nonhuman Photography

perfect illustration of Bergson’s ideas – or rather, of my own ‘differentiated
reading’ of Bergson. Bergson himself foregrounds this mutually constitutive
relationship between process and stoppage when he says that ‘Things are
constituted by the instantaneous cut which the understanding practices, at
a given moment, on a flux of this kind, and what is mysterious when we
compare the cuts together becomes clear when we relate them to the
flux’.258 This supposition allows us to posit photography as an ultimately
salutary and creative force in managing the duration of the world by the
human as a species with limited cognitive and sensory capacity.
The notion of the creative role of the imaging process in life has also
recently made its manifestation in the work of radical biologists, such as
Lynn Margulis. As she puts it in a book co-authored with her son Dorian
Sagan, ‘All living beings, not just animals, but plants and microorganisms,
perceive. To survive, an organic being must perceive – it must seek, or at
least recognize, food and avoid environmental danger’. 259 This act of
perception, which involves the seeking out and recognition of something
else, involves the making of an image of that something else (food,
predator, sexual partner), one that needs to be at least temporarily fixed in
order for the required proximity – for consumption or sex – to be
accomplished. We could perhaps therefore suggest that imaging is a form of
proto-photography, planting the seed of the combined human-machinic
‘desire’ explored by Batchen that came to its own in the early nineteenth
century. After Bergson, images (which are not yet photographs) stand for ‘a
certain existence which is more than that which the idealist calls a
representation, but less than that which the realist calls a thing – an
existence placed half-way between the “thing” and the “representation”’.260
It is precisely through images that novelty comes into the world, which is
why images should not be reduced to mere representations but should
rather be understood as creations, ‘some of which are philosophical, some
artistic, some scientific’.261 To put this another way, the creative impulse of
life takes it beyond representation as a form of picturing what already
exists: instead, life is a creation of images in the most radical sense, a way of
temporarily stabilising matter into forms. Photographic practice as we
conventionally know it, with all the automatism it entails, is just one
instantiation of this creative process of life.
If all life is indeed photographic, the notion of the photographic apparatus
that embraces yet also goes beyond the human becomes fundamental to our
understanding of what we have called the photographic condition. To speak
of the photographic apparatus is of course not just to argue for a
straightforward replacement of the human vision with a machinic one, but
rather to recognise the mutual intertwining and co-constitution of the
Bergson, Creative Evolution, 272.
L Margulis and D Sagan, What Is Life?, University of California, Berkeley and
Los Angeles, 2000, p. 27.
260 Bergson, Matter and Memory, p. vii.
261 Colebrook, Deleuze, p. 23.
258
259

148

The Creative Power of Nonhuman Photography

organic and the machinic, the technical and the discursive, in the
production of vision, and hence of the world. In her work on the use of
apparatuses in physics experiments, the philosopher and quantum physicist
Karen Barad argues that such devices are not just ‘passive observing
instruments; on the contrary, they are productive of (and part of)
phenomena’.262 We could easily apply this argument to photography, where
the camera as a viewing device, the photographic frame both in the
viewfinder and as the circumference of a photographic print, the enlarger,
the computer, the printer, the photographer (who, in many instances, such
as surveillance or speed cameras, is replaced by the camera-eye), and, last
but not least, the discourses about photography and vision that produce
them as objects for us humans are all active agents in the constitution of a
photograph. In other words, they are all part of what we understand by
photography.

Becoming a camera

Image 7. An example from Lindsay Seers's series It Has To Be This Way, 2009.

As signalled earlier, it is not just philosophy that help us envisage this
nonhuman, machinic dimension of photography: photographic, and, more
broadly, artistic practice is even better predisposed to enact it (rather than
just provide an argument about it). A series of works by British artist
Lindsay Seers is a case in point. Exhibited, among other places, at Matt’s
Gallery in London as It Has To Be This Way in 2009, and accompanied by
an aptly titled book, Human Camera, Seers’ ongoing project consists of a
K Barad, Meeting the Universe Halfway: Quantum Physics and the
Entanglement of Matter and Meaning,: Duke University Press, Durham, 2007, p.
142.

262

149

The Creative Power of Nonhuman Photography

number of seemingly autobiographic films. These are full of bizarre yet justabout-believable adventures occurring to their heroine, all verified by a
body of ‘experts’ – from doctors and critics through to family members –
that appear in the films but also leave behind ‘evidence’ in the form of
numerous written accounts, photographs and documentary records. In one
of the films, a young girl, positioned as ‘Lindsay Seers’, is living her life
unable to make a distinction between herself and the world, or between the
world and its representations. The girl is gifted with exceptional memory so,
like a camera that is permanently switched on, she records and remembers
practically everything. ‘It is as if I was in a kaleidoscope, a bead in the
mesmerising and constantly shifting pattern. Everything was in flux, every
single moment and every single object rewritten at every turn’, as ‘Lindsay
Seers’ recalls in a short piece called ‘Becoming Something’ included in
263
Human Camera. This terrifyingly magnificent gift is lost once the girl
sees a photograph of herself. She then spends her adult life clothed in a
black sack, photographing things obsessively. In this way, she is literally
trying to ‘become a camera’ by making photographs on light-sensitive paper
inserted into her mouth, with the images produced ‘bathed in the red light’
of her body (Image 7). This ambition is later replaced by an attempt to
‘become a projector’ by creating things ex nihilo through the emanation of
light. Some of Seers’ films presented in the show are screened in a black hut
modelled on Thomas Edison’s Black Maria, his New Jersey film studio that
was used for projection as well as photography. With this, Seers invites us
not just to witness her process of becoming a camera but also to enter a
giant camera ourselves, to literally step into the world of imaging, to reconnect us to the technicity of our own being.
Although Bergson’s argument about life as a form of imaging is posited as
transhistorical, we can add a particular inflection to it by returning to
Flusser, and, in particular, his study of the relation between the human and
the technical apparatus. For Flusser, that relation changed significantly
after the Industrial Revolution, a state of events in which ‘photographers
are inside their apparatus and bound up with it... It is a new kind of
264
function in which human beings and apparatus merge into a unity’.
265
Consequently, human beings now ‘function as a function of apparatuses’,
limited as they are to the execution of the camera’s programme from the
range of seemingly infinite possibilities which are nevertheless determined
by the machine’s algorithm. Arguably, humans themselves are enactors of
such a programme, a sequence of possibilities enabled by various couplings
of adenine, cytosine, guanine and thymine, arranged into a double helix of
life. To state this is not to postulate some kind of uncritical technological or
biological determinism that would remove from ‘us’ any possibility of action
– as artists, photographers, critics, or spectators – and any responsibility
for the actions we are to take. It is merely to acknowledge our kinship with
L Seers, Human Camera, Article Press, Birmingham, 2007, p. 36.
Flusser, Towards a Philosophy, p. 27.
265 Ibid., p. 26.
263
264

150

The Creative Power of Nonhuman Photography

other living beings across the evolutionary spectrum, with our lives
remaining subject to biochemical reactions that we cannot always
understand, control or overcome (from blushing through to ageing and
dying). Just as ‘the imagination of the camera is greater than that of every
266
single photographer and that of all photographers put together’, the
imagination of ‘the programme called life’ in which we all participate (and
which is an outcome of multiple processes running across various scale of
the universe) far exceeds our human imagination. Such a recognition of our
entanglement as sentient and discursive beings in complex biological and
technical networks is necessary if we are to become involved, seriously and
responsibly, in any kind of photography, philosophy or other critical or
everyday activity in which we aim to exercise ‘free will’.

Re-forming the world
By reconnecting us to the technical apparatus, by letting us explore our
machinic kinship, artists such as the appropriately named Seers and the
other image-makers discussed in this article are all engaged (even if they
are not always up-front about it or perhaps even entirely aware of it) in
exploring the fundamental problem that many philosophers of technology
who take science seriously have been grappling with: given that ‘there is no
place for human freedom within the area of automated, programmed and
programming apparatuses’, how can we ‘show a way in which it is
267
nevertheless possible to open up a space for freedom’?
Such an
undertaking is very much needed, according to Flusser, ‘because it is the
268
only form of revolution open to us’. Flusser points to ‘envisioners’, that is
‘people who try to turn an automatic apparatus against its own condition of
269
being automatic’, as those who will be able to undertake the task of
standing ‘against the world’, by pointing ‘at it with their fingertips to inform
270
it’. In this perspective, codification and visualisation are seen as radical
interventions into the world, and ways of re-forming it, rather than as ways
of dehumanising it the way Tagg seemed to suggest.
Any prudent and effective way of envisaging and picturing a
transformation of our relation to the universe must thus be conducted not
in terms of a human struggle against the machine but rather in terms of our
mutual co-constitution, as a recognition of our shared kinship. This
recognition of the photographic condition that encompasses yet goes
beyond the human, and of the photographic apparatus that extends well
beyond our eyes and beyond the devices supposedly under our control,
should prompt us human philosophers, photographers and spectators to
Ibid., p. 30.
Ibid., pp. 81-82.
268 Ibid., p. 82; see also Flusser, Into the Universe, p. 63.
269 Flusser, Into the Universe, p. 19.
270 Ibid., p. 45.
266
267

151

The Creative Power of Nonhuman Photography

mobilise the ongoing creative impulse of life, where the whole world is a
camera, and put it to creative rather than conservative uses. The conceptual
expansion of processes of image-making beyond the human can also allow
us to work towards escaping what Colebrook calls the ‘privatization of the
271
eye in late capitalism’, where what starts out as a defence of our right to
look often ends up as a defence of our right to look at the small screen. In
challenging the self-possessive individualism of the human eye,
photography that seriously and consciously engages with its own expansive
ontological condition and its nonhuman genealogy may therefore be seen as
a truly revolutionary practice. Indeed, the concept and practice of
nonhuman photography reconnects us to other beings and processes across
the universe: including those of the Taurus Molecular Cloud. It serves as a
reminder that the short moment in natural history when the human species
272
has folded ‘the world around its own, increasingly myopic, point of view’,
and that has allowed it to become ‘seduced, spellbound, distracted and
273
captivated by inanity’,
should not obscure the wider horizon of our
openness to the world, our relationality with it through originary
perception. Nonhuman photography can therefore serve as both a response
274
to ‘man’s tendency to reify himself’ and an opening towards a radical
posthumanist political analysis. It can do this by highlighting that there is
more than just one point of view and that, by tearing the eye from the body
and embracing the distributed machinic vision, it may be possible to see the
drone as a more than just a killing machine – although of course there are
275
no guarantees.

Joanna Zylinska is Professor of New Media and Communications at
Goldsmiths, University of London. She is the author and editor of many
books on technology, culture, art and ethics, including Bioethics in the Age
of New Media (MIT Press, 2009) and Life after New Media: Mediation as
a Vital Process (MIT Press, 2012, with Sarah Kember), and Minimal Ethics
for the Anthropocene (Open Humanities Press, 2014), and a fine art
photographer. She is also a curator of the online platform Photomediations
Machine.

Colebrook, Deleuze, p. 17.
C Colebrook, Death of the PostHuman: Essays on Extinction, Vol. 1, Open
Humanities Press, Ann Arbor, 2014, p. 22.
273 Ibid., p. 15.
274 Ibid., p. 15.
275 For a playful, tactical media-style exploration of what a drone would do in
times of peace see IOCOSE’s project, Drone Selfies, 2014,
http://photomediationsmachine.net/2014/08/06/drone-selfies/.
271
272

152

The Creative Power of Nonhuman Photography

Bibliography
Barad, K., Meeting the Universe Halfway: Quantum Physics and the
Entanglement of Matter and Meaning, Duke University Press, Durham,
2007.
Batchen, G., Burning with Desire: The Conception of Photography, MIT
Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1999.
Bergson, H., Creative Evolution, Random House, The Modern Library, New
York, 1944 (first published in 1911).
Bergson, H., Matter and Memory, George Allen & Unwinn Ltd., London,
1911.
Colebrook, C., Death of the PostHuman: Essays on Extinction, Vol. 1. Open
Humanities Press, Ann Arbor, 2014.
Colebrook, C., Deleuze and the Meaning of Life, Continuum, London and
New York, 2010.
Edwards, S., Photography: A Very Short Introduction, Oxford University
Press, Oxford, 2006.
Flusser, V., Into the Universe of Technical Images, University of Minnesota
Press, Minneapolis, 2011.
Flusser, V., Towards a Philosophy of Photography, Reaktion Books,
London, 2000.
Fried, M., Why Photography Matters as Art as Never Before, Yale
University Press, New Haven, 2008.
Kember, S. and Zylinska, J., Life After New Media: Mediation as a Vital
Process, MIT Press, Cambridge, 2012.
Margulis, L. and Sagan, D., What Is Life?, University of California, Berkeley
and Los Angeles, 2000.
Michaels, W. B., "Photographs and Fossils", in Photography Theory,
Elkins, J. (ed.), Routledge, New York and London, 2007, pp. 431-50.
Ritchin, F., After Photography, W. W. Norton & Company, New York,
2009.
Seers, L., Human Camera, Article Press, Birmingham, 2007.

153

The Creative Power of Nonhuman Photography

Sontag, S., Regarding the Pain of Others, Picador, New York, 2003.
Tagg, J., "Mindless Photography", in Photography: Theoretical Snapshots,
Long, J. J., Noble, A. and Welch, E. (eds), Routledge, London and New
York, 2008, pp. 16-30.
Zielinski, S., [… After the Media], Univocal, Minneapolis, 2013.

On-line sources
Ducharme,

V.,

Encounters,

15.02.2014,

Photomediations

Machine,

http://photomediationsmachine.net/2014/02/15/encounters/
Ferguson, J., Stolen Images, 29.04.2013, Photomediations Machine,

http://photomediationsmachine.net/2013/04/29/stolen-images

154

