Critical Sociology 36(1) 131-150
http://crs.sagepub.com

Digital Epidermalization: Race, Identity and Biometrics
Simone Browne
University of Texas at Austin, Texas, USA

Abstract
This article considers the ways in which what Paul Gilroy terms ‘epidermal thinking’ operates in
the discourses surrounding certain surveillance practices and their applications, with a focus on
identification documents and biometric technologies in particular. My aim is not to re-ontologize
race, but instead to outline the notion of digital epidermalization, stemming from Frantz Fanon’s
concept of epidermalization, as it allows for thinking through race, ontological insecurity and the
ways in which the body materializes with and against biometric technologies. I examine key
research in surveillance studies, governmental policy documents concerning biometric enabled
identification documents and the 2003 ‘deportation’ to India of a Canadian citizen through the
issuance of an expedited removal order by the US Immigration and Naturalization Services. By
interrogating how digital epidermalization gains meaning and is put into practice, this article seeks
to posit a space for refusals of such epidermal thinking through a critical biometric consciousness.
Keywords
biometrics, biometric technology, race, racialization, surveillance

Introduction
On 26 January 2003 Berna Cruz, a Canadian citizen, was detained and questioned by
US Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) officials at Chicago’s O’Hare
International Airport, and subsequently ‘deported’ to India. After returning from a three
week vacation in India, Cruz was scheduled to take a connecting flight from Chicago to
Toronto. On arrival in Chicago, she met with a US Customs official who, upon examining Cruz’s Canadian passport, deemed it ‘funky’ and claimed that it contained unspecified chemicals. In a later interview with a reporter from the Toronto Star newspaper,
Cruz stated that she was subjected to questioning, including: ‘How come your name is
not Singh?’, ‘What is a toonie?’,1 ‘Why do you have a Latin name?’, ‘Aren’t you smart
Copyright © The Author(s), 2009. Reprints and Permissions:
http://www.sage.pub.co.uk/journals.permissions.nav

DOI: 10.1177/0896920509347144

132

Critical Sociology 36(1)

using a Spanish name?’ and ‘Did you buy this passport in Sri Lanka?’ (Rankin 2003).
This line of questioning reveals how nation profiling operates at international border
crossings. In this case, Sri Lanka is imagined as producing suspect identification to facilitate illicit travel. Cruz provided numerous identity documents for the INS officials,
including her Province of Ontario Driver’s Licence, Ontario Health Card and a letter of
employment from her employer, which she had in her possession at the time. The INS
officials told Cruz that her passport was forged. In this case, Cruz was subject to the
customs officer’s ‘nationalizing gaze’ (Löfgren 1999) that situated her as not Canadian. In
the Toronto Star interview, Cruz stated that she was given the option of either being sent
to India or to jail, and that her repeated requests to contact Canadian officials were
ignored. Instead, her passport was cut and each page was marked ‘expedited removal’. An
expedited removal order, once issued at the prerogative of a customs official, cannot be
contested. Cruz was placed on a Kuwaiti Airlines flight to India. Cruz was eventually
issued an emergency passport that was affixed to her damaged one through the Canadian
consulate in Dubai, where officials verified that her now defaced passport was not counterfeit or altered but was indeed genuine (Cruz 2003). In regard to Cruz’s ordeal, US
Congressman Joseph Crowley wrote a letter to then US Secretary of Homeland Security
Tom Ridge about Cruz’s encounter, demanding an explanation about the situation. The
response from the Department of Homeland Security: ‘colour of skin is not the issue.
The issue at hand is the document’, and ‘what she perceives as abuse was mistaken for
her own malfeasance in attempting to enter with an altered document’ (Sperry 2003).
Identification documents serve as a key technology in the contemporary management
of human mobility, security applications and consumer transactions, particularly those
that are state sanctioned. By putting identity into practice, identification documents,
such as photo enhanced credit cards and more so passports, not only codify gender, race
and often citizenship, but they also help to organize understandings of security, the
nation and its material and discursive borders. In this article, I consider the ways in which
what Paul Gilroy terms ‘epidermal thinking’ (1997: 195) operates in the discourses surrounding certain surveillance practices and their applications, with a focus on identification documents and biometric technologies in particular. Epidermal thinking marks the
epistemologies concerning sight and the racialized body. My intent here is not in defense
of ‘race-thinking’ (Gilroy 2000: 30), nor is it an effort to re-ontologize race, but to situate biometric technology as a technique through which the cultural production and the
visual economy of race can be understood. Following Eugene Thacker’s call for a ‘critical
genomic consciousness’ (2005: 172) in relation to biotechnology, what I am suggesting
here is that we must engage a critical biometric consciousness as well. A critical biometric consciousness entails informed public debate, accountability by the state and the private sector and sees biometric technology as a human technology, where the ownership
of and access to one’s own body data and other intellectual property that is generated
from one’s body data must be understood as a human right.
This article is organized as follows. First, I discuss the notion of digital epidermalization. Stemming from Frantz Fanon’s concept of epidermalization, I suggest that digital
epidermalization allows for thinking through race, ontological insecurity and the

Browne: Digital Epidermalization

133

body made biometric. Following this, I review key thinking in surveillance studies and
the governing of the self. Such a discussion considers the market-oriented, governing
principles of neo-liberal capitalism to understand this moment of the integration of
the military, the private sector and the state in for-profit identity management. This
integration marks the ascendance of a global, ‘identity-industrial complex’ (Browne
2005, 2007). I suggest that this focus on identity is not only about new technologies of
surveillance and governance at the border, but it is also about the neo-pastoral governing
of the responsible and ‘enterprising self ’ (Rose 1992). Next, in order to examine some
of the governmental discourses regarding race, identification documents and biometric
technologies, I examine the proposal of a national identity card to be issued to all
Canadians. Last, I return to the 2003 expedited removal to India of Canadian citizen
Berna Cruz for what it reveals regarding racial purging and understanding the border,
the document and discretionary power. In this way, this article approaches surveillance
studies with a critical theorizing on race.

Dark Matter, White Prototypicality2
Paul Gilroy observes that where previously the idea of race was produced as that which
is anatomical, where a certain and essential ‘truth’ was said to be written on the body,
scopic and microscopic regimes of seeing (for example, genomics, ultrasonography, neuroimaging, computed tomography) are laying bare the previously unseen at increasingly
intimate scales (1997, 2000). The highly mediated production of ‘truth’ and racial discourse through scientific method that relied on cultural production and representation,
myth and colonial project-making has been augmented by ways and technologies of seeing that have the minute as their focus. Gilroy suggests that ‘the observational habits that
have been associated with the consolidation of today’s nano-science might also facilitate
the development of an emphatically postracial humanism’ (2000: 37). My intervention
is not to negate this potentially progressive moment that Gilroy alerts us to, but to claim
that unlike the technological advances that Gilroy accounts for, with biometrics, the
racialized body is not ‘nothing more than an incidental moment in the transmission of
code and information’ (Gilroy, 2000: 36). Instead, it is these moments of observation,
calibration and application that can reveal themselves as racializing. Often with certain
biometric technologies and their attendant ‘observational habits’ this potentially postracial humanism is elided.
What I attend to in this article are these moments of observation, calibration and
application through the use of Gilroy’s assertion that the pseudoscientific enterprise of
truth-seeking in racial difference, where the intention is ‘to make the mute body disclose
the truth of its racial identities’, can be more fully comprehended through the Fanonian
concept of epidermalization (1997: 195).3 For Fanon, epidermalization is a way of thinking
the ontological insecurity of the racial body as it experiences its ‘being through others’
(1967: 109). This disassociation between ‘the self and of the world’ (1967: 111) is experienced through, but not solely, the skin. Differentiated through that which is porous – the

134

Critical Sociology 36(1)

skin – a surface perceptive to touch, the body is dissected, fixed ‘and woven out of a
thousand details, anecdotes and stories’ (1967: 111), denied its specificity, and in so
becomes negatively racialized. Beyond the surface of Fanon’s corporeal schema – ‘a definitive structuring of the self and of the world’ (1967: 111) rather than an imposition – we
find the historic-racial schema that allows for the ontological insecurity of a body made
out of place. It is the making of the body as out of place, an attempt to deny its capacity
for humanness, which makes for the productive power of epidermalization. I am taking
epidermalization here not solely by its cutaneous understanding, but as the Fanonian
contact moment of fracture of the body from its humanness, refracted into a new subject position (‘Look, a Negro!’, or an ‘illegal alien’, or some other negatively racialized
subject position). It is the interpellating gaze of the moment of contact that produces
these moments of fracture for the racial Other, indeed making and marking one as racial
Other, experiencing its ‘being through others’ (1967: 109). This is not to say that by
being object to the gaze one is interpellated into a completely passive, negated object,
existing only as objection. Instead, Fanon offers insightful corrective to theorizing
moments and spaces of contact and lived objectification, where instead the racial subject’s
humanness is already established, and identities are realized and constructed by the self;
where the consciousness of the racialized subject ‘does not hold itself out of lack. It is.’
(1967: 135) So this making of ‘out of placeness’ must be read also as indicative and
productive of what Katherine McKittrick terms ‘the deep spaces of black geographies’
(2006: 25).4 These deep spaces are rooted in what Rinaldo Walcott calls ‘a diasporic
sensibility’ where geography must also be understood as political, ‘related, in various
resistances and responses, to an internationalist ethic and solidarity that refuses current
transnational capital’s organization of our lives’ (2006: 88). Such refusals and solidarity
mark the productive possibilities of alternatives to epidermal thinking.5
How can epidermalization, as a concept, be made useful at a scale of digitized code? I
suggest here that we come to think of the concept of digital epidermalization when we
conceptualize the body made biometric. By digitized code I am referring to the possibilities of identification that are said to come with certain biometric technologies, where
algorithms are the computational means through which the body, or more specifically
parts and pieces of it, are mathematically coded as data, making for unique templates for
computers to then sort by relying on a searchable database (on-line or one-to-many/1:N
identification), or to verify the identity of the bearer of the document within which the
unique biometric is encoded. The latter is termed one-to-one/1:1 or off-line verification.
Popular biometric surveillance technologies include iris and retinal scans, hand geometry,
fingerprint data, facial and vascular patterns, and gait recognition. In simple terms,
biometrics is a technology of measuring the living body. The application of this technology is in the verification and identification practices that enable the body to function as
evidence. Identities, in these digitizing instances, must also be thought through their
construction within discourse, understood, following Stuart Hall, as ‘produced in specific
historical and institutional sites within specific discursive formations and practices, by
specific enunciative strategies’ (1996: 4). The notion of a body made out of place, or

Browne: Digital Epidermalization

135

made ontologically insecure, is useful when thinking through the moments of contact
enacted at the ‘institutional sites’ of international border crossings and spaces of the
internal borders of the state, such as the voting booth and other sites and moments where
identification, and increasingly biometric identification, is required to speak the ‘truth’
of and for muted bodies. These sites and moments are productive of, and often necessitate ontological insecurity, where ‘the body is surrounded by an atmosphere of certain
uncertainty’ (Fanon 1967: 111). This atmosphere of certain uncertainty is part of what
Lewis Gordon refers to as ‘the problematic of a denied subjectivity’ (2004: 3). On this,
Gordon is worth quoting at length:
Fanon’s insight, shared by Du Bois, is that there is no inner subjectivity, where there is
no being, where there is no one there, and where there is no link to another subjectivity
as ward, as guardian, or owner, then all is permitted. Since in fact there is an Other human
being in the denied relationship, evidenced by, say, antiblack racism, what this means is
that there is a subjectivity that is experiencing a world in which all is permitted against
him or her. (2004: 3)

For Gordon, this is a structured violence where ‘all is permitted’ and where this structured violence is productive of and produced by a certain white normativity. Meaning
that whiteness is made normative, and in so being, raceless, or what David Theo
Goldberg terms ‘racially invisible’ (1997: 83). What Gordon insightfully terms the
‘notion of white prototypicality’ (2004: 4) is the enabling condition of the structured violence of ‘the dialectics of recognition’ (2004: 3). What I am suggesting here is that this
prototypical whiteness is one facet of the cultural and technological logic that informs
many instances of the practices of biometrics and the visual economy of recognition and
verification that accompany these practices. Practices here are taken to include research
and development (R&D), applications, and governmental rationalization. Digital
epidermalization is the exercise of power cast by the disembodied gaze of certain
surveillance technologies (for example, identity card and e-passport verification machines)
that can be employed to do the work of alienating the subject by producing a ‘truth’
about the body and one’s identity (or identities) despite the subject’s claims.
To understand the practices of white prototypicality, I turn to some recent statements
appearing in publications in biometrics R&D, as they are telling of industry concerns
and specifications. For example, Nanavati et al. note that in comparative testing with
control groups, higher failure to enrol rates (FTE) appear with those whose fingerprints
are said to be unmeasurable. They state:
Elderly users often have very faint fingerprints and may have poorer circulation than
younger users. Construction workers and artisans are more likely to have highly worn
fingerprints, to the point where ridges are nearly nonexistent. Users of Pacific
Rim/Asian descent may have faint fingerprint ridges – especially female users.
(2002: 36–7, emphasis mine).

136

Critical Sociology 36(1)

Could these systems be calibrated to allow for cutaneous gender detection? Further,
Nanavati et al. note that facial scan technology may produce higher FTE rates for ‘very
dark-skinned users’, not due to ‘lack of distinctive features, of course, but to the quality
of images provided to the facial-scan system by video cameras optimized for lighterskinned users’ (2002: 37).6 In this way, the technology privileges whiteness, or at least
lightness, in its use of lighting. This same logic of prototypical whiteness is seemingly
present in earlier models of iris-scan technology that were based on 8-bit grayscale image
capture, allowing for 256 shades of gray but leaving very dark irises ‘clustered at one end
of the spectrum’ (Nanavati et al. 2002: 37).7 The distribution of this spectrum’s 256
shades of gray is made possible only through the unambiguous black-white binary; the
contrapuntal extremes that anchor the spectrum leaving the dark matter clustered at one
end. Such epidermal thinking is present in other research on facial recognition technology
where ‘the facial feature quantities (spacing between eyes, turn up of the eyes, thickness of
mouth etc.) are classified’; it is suggested that systems ‘can search for faces with a certain
feature, if the degree of the feature quantity is designated’ (Lao and Kawade 2004: 346).
Here, the possibilities for digital epidermalization are revealed.

Working the Body Wholesale
Centralized databases are techniques for knowing the body and behavioral traits through
the accumulation of records, whether transactional records or body records.8 Here, the
body is worked wholesale through databases that provide a means by which to cluster
individuals into certain segments, sometimes with the purposes of identifying risks,
potential markets, or both. Not all databases are state-run. Some are the domain of market research companies and information brokers such as US-based Acxiom, others are
repositories of traveller information such as Galileo International Incorporated, while
some are credit reporting agencies such as Equifax and TransUnion. All of these companies are profit driven and traffic in information. Increasingly, these database companies
are working in tandem with the state, law enforcement and the military.9 My situating of
the ID cards, passports and their networked relation to databases leading to possibilities
of profiling through patterns and ‘raceless racism’10 might appear speculative but often it
is only a matter of time before what was speculation materializes as truth. For example,
the 2006 announcement of the Automated Targeting System by US Homeland Security
that has assigned risk profiles, so called ‘terror scores’, to millions of unwitting travellers
since 2002 based on methods of payment, frequent flyer records, gender, seating and
meal preferences, such as the choice of a halal meal. Here the traveller is profiled through
his patterns and the inclusion of frequent flyer records marks the collusion of commercial
entities with this practice of identity management.
Another component of this system of knowing and governing databased bodies is the
manufacturers that develop and produce identity documents and the hardware and
software that support their use. My use of the term ‘bodies’ here, rather than ‘people’ or
‘individuals’ is not to deny ontological validity to those to whom these documents are

Browne: Digital Epidermalization

137

issued, instead ‘bodies’ points to the ways that identity documents fragment individuals
into bodies and more specifically body components and features (sex, height, hair color,
eye color, and technology that could digitize permanent physical features) for the
purposes of reading, sorting, or categorizing the body, and sometimes for profiling and
pre-emption. Identity documents and the dossiers that accompany them are one of the
techniques that organize categories of state subjecthood, such as the citizen, the undocumented, the temporary work visa holder, the certificate of Indian status cardholder or
the Canadian permanent resident (Browne 2005). The application procedures to obtain
such documents and the use of ID documents are about border control and self-control,
where the successful card applicant is realized as responsible, strategizing, rational choicemaking, and self-controlled.11 In this way, application procedures function as both
neo-liberal and neo-pastoral governance practices.
A key ideology involved in the practices and arrangement of border control and selfcontrol is that of neo-liberalism. Neo-liberalism has been explained as a ‘choice obsessed
discourse’ (Valverde 1996: 364) where the idea of enterprise models of governance is
found not only within the state, but extends to the subject as well. Here the individual is
understood as conducting herself in enterprising and entrepreneurial ways through a discourse of rights and freedoms (Rose 1992, 1993). So people are tasked with becoming
entrepreneurs of themselves (Lemke 2001). As a form of governmentality, neo-liberalism
is premised on market values structuring the ways of being of institutions and of social
actors. It is a rationality where governance is sought through the market, where even the
state is organized to ‘think and behave like a market actor’ (Brown 2003: 3). This often
means pursuing public-private partnerships, such as trusted traveller programs.
Considering neo-liberal governmentality as an enterprise model of governance, where
enterprise forms of governance have as their objective market accountability, autonomization of its subjects, and extending the market model throughout society leads me to ask:
what do enterprise models of governance look like at the border? In asking this question,
I am mindful of Mariana Valverde’s caution against totalizing analyses of liberal governance that neglect to reflect on how illiberal logics of rule are often equal parts of what
constitutes liberalism (1996: 138). Here governance might take the shape of liberalism
and ‘non-liberal’ practices such as patriarchy, despotism and racism. Instead, Valverde calls
for an approach that takes into account the limits and instabilities of liberal governance
and suggests looking at how space, specifically how the reliance of liberal governance on
‘common-sense assumptions about spatially based difference’, works to naturalize relations
of rule that have both liberal and illiberal logics (1996: 368). For example, the developments of racist taxonomies of colonized spaces and the people who inhabit them as a
rationale for the application of specific techniques when governing ‘the passions in hot
climates’ at the same time as liberal governance is purportedly happening in the so-called
moderate climates of the metropole (1996: 368). Or the ‘illiberal logic’ of rule at international border crossings, where one’s crossing depends on the prerogative of the inspection
agent, whether human or machine. Following Valverde, space should serve as a conceptual tool that could allow for theorists within the writings on neo-liberal governmentality
to understand how contradictory modes of governance necessarily work in tandem. This

138

Critical Sociology 36(1)

is a useful way to think about the state border as a site where the various administrative
and bureaucratic techniques that support it (databases, passports, visas, identification
cards and their application procedures) reveal contradictory modes of governance for those
who cross or attempt to cross it. Increasingly, the border must be understood as a transactional and often automated space with multiple locations, including electronic databases. Also, we must understand the border as enacted at the scale of the body.
David Lyon suggests that bodily surveillance is not a new phenomenon. He has illustrated how the pseudo-science of criminal anthropometry ‘claimed that body shapes,
especially the head, could spontaneously reveal the unlawful proclivities of the person’
(2001: 291). It is worth noting here that the ‘statistical knowledge of anthropometry’
(Li et al. 2004: 173) is still being invoked in biometric technology R&D. As Li et al.
suggest, ‘the difference of Races is obvious, and it is the core field of research of anthropology. Anthropometry is a key technique to find out this difference and abstract the
regulation from this difference’ (2004: 173). As the theoretical basis from which to
develop a facial computational model that could qualify difference to allow for identity
authentification, Li et al. claim: ‘as a result of using the statistical information of the
Mongolian Race’s feature, our method is suitable to be used in the north of China’ (2004:
178). Claims such as these demonstrate that some advances in biometric authentification
are organized around the idea of race or epidermal thinking.
Similar to Lyon in asserting that bodily surveillance is by no means a new occurrence,
Christian Parenti discusses the surveillance system of the plantation of the Antebellum South
of the United States and names the information technologies of the written slave pass,
organized slave patrols and wanted posters for runaways as key features of the surveillance
practices of this system (2003). Parenti situates plantation surveillance as the earliest form
of surveillance practices in the Americas. The following two excerpts from Born in Slavery:
Slave Narratives from the Federal Writers’ Project, 1936–1938 detail the disciplinary practices
of the slave pass system. In the plantation system, mobility and its restriction for enslaved
Africans, served as an exercise of power. Given this, mobility needed to be tightly regulated
by slave owners in order for the owners to maintain control:
By 1845 there were many laws on the Statute books of Georgia concerning the duties of
patrols … Every member of the patrol was required to arrest all slaves found outside their
master’s domain without a pass, or who was not in company with some white person. He
was empowered to whip such slave with twenty lashes. [Georgia Narratives] (Work
Projects Administration 1941a: 322)
The pattie-rollers was something else. I heard folks say they would beat the daylights
almost out of you if they caught you without no pass. [Georgia Narratives] (Work
Projects Administration 1941b: 241)12

Slave branding was one of the key technologies of the trans-Atlantic slave trade. As
Hortense Spillers emphasizes, this trafficking marked a violent ‘theft of the body’ rendering
the captive body ‘a territory of cultural and political maneuver’ (2003: 206). Branding

Browne: Digital Epidermalization

139

was a practice and, borrowing from Hall, an enunciative strategy through which enslaved
people were signified as property and commodities to be bought and sold. At the scale of
skin, the captive body was made site of political and economic maneuver through the use
of hot irons to sear the flesh. The brand, often the crest of the sovereign, was a stamp of
commodity, a signifier of bondage and of the relation of the body to its said owner. For
the Dutch West India Company, these marks of identification were used to identify those
who were enslaved, distinguishing them from those enslaved by the English, the French
or other slaveholding entities (Hartman 2007). Enslaved persons were marked with
numbers and letters that identified them as being part of a particular ship’s cargo. This
practice also worked as a system of identification that enabled surveillance. So with this
permanent marking on the flesh, one could hardly escape the identity given to them as
commodity, strictly in an economic sense. These markings form the earliest imprint of
mass state and corporate tracking of people through registration tied to bodily identification. Slave branding, operated in the plantation system as a practice of punishment,
accounting and of making the already hyper-visible body legible.13 Branding, as a means
of knowing the body, was a pre-emptive practice marking one as recognizable outside of
the plantation site, whether outside through escape or other means. Surveillance practices
such as those mentioned above point to the longer history of boundary maintenance
occurring at the site of the body. Current biometric technologies and slave branding are
not one and the same; however, when we think of our contemporary moment where ‘suspect’ citizens, trusted travellers, prisoners and others are having their bodies informationalized by way of biometric surveillance – sometimes voluntarily and sometimes
without consent or awareness – and then stored in large-scale databases – some owned
by the state and some owned by private interests – we can find histories of these accountings and inventories of the bodies in slave registers, slave branding and the slave vessel
manifests that served insurance purposes. My suggestion here is that questioning the
historically present workings of branding, the body and race, particularly in regard to
biometrics, could allow for a critical rethinking of our moments of contact with our
increasingly technological border.
Movement, especially that across internationally recognized borders, brings contact
with strangers. Often such contact calls identities into question. Lyon situates passports,
driver’s licenses, credit cards and other documents as symbols of what he terms the
‘stable self ’ that work to prove our identities (2001: 305). These symbols of the stable
self function on two levels. While serving as proof of identity, they also provide our
connection to a surveillance regime that classifies and monitors the movement of bodies,
as well as those movements that are ‘bodyless’ (2001: 305). The term ‘bodyless’ points to
the interactions and transactions, often electronic, which are taking place in porous areas
such as cyberspace, credit bureau databases, and automated health, library patron and
telephone records. Lyon suggests that ‘body surveillance reduces identity questions to
what can be found in the text of the body itself ’ (2001: 306). With the body as text, risk
management and assessment are assured through what is said to be an authoritative truth.
Given this, ‘data from the object of the body rather than speech from the acting subject’
(2001: 306) are taken as authoritative truth, as in the use of DNA samples to convict

140

Critical Sociology 36(1)

those accused of a crime with bodily evidence. Certain ID documents symbolize the stable
self. Once the self can be certified by the state as stable, an increased freedom of mobility
and stability can be granted. However, this increased freedom of mobility is accompanied
by an increasing integration of the stable self into a surveillance regime that monitors,
tracks, classifies, and often takes the shape of the database.
Body data, including that which is biographical, that is profiled, circulates and is
traded within and between databases is often marked by gender, nation, region, race and
other categories where the life-chances of many, as Lyon notes, are:
more circumscribed by the categories into which they fall. For some, those categories are
particularly prejudicial, restricting them from consumer choices because of credit ratings,
or, more insidiously, relegating them to second-class status because of their color or
ethnic background (2003: 675).

Similarly, Goldberg employs the term ‘raceless racism’ to describe the practice of
media technologies facilitating certain codes of determination, or techniques of governing
populations, that are difficult to address but could have racist effects.

Arithmetics of the Skin
When Canada’s former Minister of Citizenship and Immigration Denis Coderre
launched a national debate by recommending that identity cards be issued to all
Canadians, he noted that ‘identity has taken on a new prominence’ (2003) since the
events of 11 September 2001. He suggested that debating an identity card would provide
the opportunity ‘to clarify what it means to be a citizen, a Canadian’ (2003). Speaking
about identity, Coderre highlighted its importance and stated:
As a matter of fact, if I can quote James Baldwin, the US author from Harlem who was
a tremendous activist, he said, ‘An identity is questioned only when it is menaced,’ and
that’s it. I believe the time has come to decide what to believe as to what an identity is
and how we can protect it. (2003)

In the following excerpt from this Standing Committee on Citizenship and
Immigration meeting held in Ottawa, Canada, Coderre sets forth his agenda on identity
based on post-11 September 2001 security imperatives regarding mobility and document
integrity, where the production of insecurity, as a practice that invokes certain anxieties
around terror, is linked to identity theft and the events of 11 September 2001. Standing
Committee meetings are social events that represent and constitute a particular kind of
political and discursive space. By political and discursive space I mean a space in which
certain participants are produced and positioned as subjects with rights to speak and be
heard, some are positioned as subjects with interests to represent, some are produced as
having expertise, while other individuals and groups are just talked about. It is important

Browne: Digital Epidermalization

141

to note here that this is a governmental space where discourse is understood as operating
beyond texts and what is said, and where discourse is also understood as produced by
power and also constitutive of it. My aim here is not to isolate texts and practices from
their material context, but rather to explore the ways in which texts and practices are
produced by, and are constitutive of, relations of power. I use italics to underscore the key
terms from these verbatim excerpts that I analyze below.
Hon. Denis Coderre (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration): … In the aftermath
of the terrorist attacks in the United States on September 11, 2001, identity has taken a
new prominence in countries around the world. Canada has been no different.
Canadians have come to see the ability to establish identity as an important element of
personal and collective security.
While the new focus on a positive proof of identity is partially rooted in the aftermath of
the terrorist attacks, other forces are at play. Identity theft is seen as a serious and growing
problem in Canada.
Within a few years, or maybe much sooner, the ability of Canadian citizens and
permanent residents to cross international borders will depend increasingly on the
integrity of their travel documents. The integrity of those documents will be determined by
the strength of the identity documents on which they are issued.
… Closer to home, the United States is reviewing their requirements for travellers
coming into their country. The time when Canadians and permanent residents could be
confident of crossing the border into the United States solely on the basis of a valid driver’s
licence may well be over. This is happening at a time when Canada does not have an
explicit official national identity policy or an identity system. (Standing Committee on
Citizenship and Immigration 2003)

The concept of ‘being Canadian’ and the ‘confidence’ attributed to the rights of mobility
that come with such status is understood as being tenuous and evolving. Coderre notes
that the ability to sustain confidence in ‘being Canadian’, particularly during the crossing
of international borders, is dependent on document integrity. The repetitive use of the
words ‘integrity’ and ‘identity’, collocated with ‘travel documents’, ‘proof’, ‘establish’, ‘theft’
and ‘terrorist attacks’, demonstrate the functioning of the discourse of border control. By
way of repetition, a discursive link is established between these terms. In other words,
within the discourse of border control, document integrity is advanced as one solution
to terror. Significantly, Coderre alludes to the devaluation of certain status documents
(‘crossing the border into the United States solely on the basis of a valid driver’s licence
may well be over’). This devaluation of identity documents opens a space for the ‘explicit
official national identity policy or an identity system’ that Coderre advanced. It is evident
from the above excerpt that this proposed national system would be shaped by US security
imperatives. The discussion of US security imperatives, biometrics and race continued:

142

Critical Sociology 36(1)
Ms. Madeleine Dalphond-Guiral (Laval Centre, Bloc Québécois): … If the Americans
insisted that our ID card list a person’s birth place, would you be prepared to go against
them on this?
Mr. Denis Coderre: I won’t give you a pat answer such as ‘I’ll cross that bridge when I
come to it’, since I think I’ve already made my position quite clear about racial profiling
and stuff like that. One thing is certain, however. I do think this card could serve as a
prevention tool. Basically, every person has his or her own unique identity. Biometric
identifiers such as facial recognition, iris scans and fingerprints eliminate any need for
listing the card holder’s birth place.
… In my opinion, the use of biometric identifiers will prevent some problems that could
arise if disclosure of a person’s place of birth was requested. This is an extremely
important issue to debate.

Coderre employs an authoritative voice with his mention of declarative sentences
(‘One thing is certain’ and ‘every person has his or her own unique identity’) in his discussion of the function of biometric identifiers. It is made quite clear from these statements that Coderre understands biometric technology as a means to counter, in his own
words, ‘racial profiling and stuff like that’. However, I suggest that the disembodied gaze
cast by surveillance technologies also does the sorting work of nationalizing, and by
extension racializing. This is especially so when race is codified by way of country code,
offering a certain geography of race. Or when facial recognition technology is calibrated
to only cull matches from within specified racial and gendered groupings, leading to high
FTE rates for some groupings, as discussed earlier. The application of surveillance technologies in this way leads to questions concerning the idea that gender and race can be
specified, and also, how transgendered and intersexed people ‘fit’ into this algorithmic
equation. There is a certain assumption with these technologies that categories of gender
identity are clear cut, that a machine can be programmed to assign gender categories or
what bodies and body parts ‘should’ signify.14 Such technologies certainly can be applied
to determine who has access to movement and stability, and to other rights. Following
Anne Balsamo here, I am suggesting that we question the effects that certain technologies (in this case, ID cards, databases and biometrics) have on ‘cultural enactments of
gender’ (1996: 9) and how such technologies are ‘ideologically shaped by the operation
of gender interests and, consequently, how they serve to reinforce traditional gendered
patterns of power and authority’ (1996: 10).
Later in this Committee meeting the topics of identity, the ‘Canadian way’ and
biometrics continued.
Ms. Libby Davies (Vancouver East, New Democratic Party): … I was curious in
listening to your remarks when you said, ‘We are also seeking to clarify what it means
to be a citizen, a Canadian’, and, ‘Establishing one’s identity goes to the very essence of
these questions.’

Browne: Digital Epidermalization

143

I guess I’d like to challenge you on that a bit, because what right does the state have to
determine someone’‘s identity? That’s an issue that comes from us individually, from our
experience, and from our background or whatever. So the very notion that the state
would have enormous power to establish this identity ...
And you’re raising the question here that it wouldn’t just be for specific purposes, but
somehow it goes to the heart of what it means to be a Canadian. So I have a lot of
difficulty with this. …
Mr. Denis Coderre: /…/ Frankly, I believe that biometrics doesn’t have a race, and doesn’t
have a religion. Using biometric matching, we want to know if the person or cardholder
and the card itself are the same. We won’t look at the colour of the skin; we want to know
mathematically if the thumbprint fits.
That’s why I believe it’s a prevention tool. But I also believe that because it’s so sensitive
and it doesn’t belong to the state, but to the individual, we should have this kind of
debate. Sometimes it’s better to have these kinds of issues among ourselves and to decide
among ourselves what kind of a future we want to shape than to ask ‘What do you think?
This is what we will do.’
Identity, Canadian citizenship, is so important that I want to make sure that when those
individuals go through certain borders, they will be protected, so that it means something
to be a Canadian citizen.

How does race operate in biometrics? How does race operate in the above excerpt? Can
it be said, as Coderre put it, that ‘biometrics doesn’t have a race’? Although a programmed
algorithmic code, biometric information is said not to be information about the person
but, according to the Citizenship and Immigration Canada policy document Building a
Nation, ‘information of the person’ (2002). The history of surveillance technologies
demonstrates how such technologies have been deployed in methods where disciplinary
power is used to organize individuals into racialized categories (Cole 2001). Whether
such organizing continues today through the racialization of algorithmic code is important
to question here when considering Coderre’s statements, along with Nanavati et al.’s
R&D, discussed above, regarding FTE rates for unmeasurable fingerprints. In the above
Standing Committee excerpt, Coderre’s declarative sentences (‘We won’t look at the
colour of the skin’ and ‘we want to know mathematically if the thumbprint fits’) demonstrate how nominalization, where agents of processes are absented from the text, operates.
These statements obscure the actual people that are the border guards and that mediate
encounters and their outcomes at international borders, ports and airports. Coderre
implies a certain neutrality with these technologies and their applications; however, the
customs officials who verify documents and who ‘see if the thumbprint fits’ may not
always be as objective as Coderre purported these technologies to be, and in this way
enable digital epidermalization by way of these technologies.

144

Critical Sociology 36(1)

How do we understand the body once it is made into data? What are the underlying
assumptions with surveillance technologies, such as passport verification machines, facial
recognition software or fingerprint template technology? There is the notion that these
technologies are infallible and that they are objectivist technologies which assume a
mathematical precision, without error or bias on the part of the computer programmers
who calibrate the search parameters of these machines or on the part of those who read
these templates to make decisions, such as the decision in 2004 in which US citizen
Brandon Mayfield was wrongfully determined to be involved with the Madrid, Spain
train bombings based on a latent fingerprint (Cole 2006). Although verification
machines now do the work of sorting the bearers of identity documents, these machines
are designed and operated by real people to sort real people. It is through the human
aspects of this process of sorting that the digitized, biometric body is brought into view.
Through this process of visualizing and sorting, the digitized body and in effect its material, human counterpart could be epidermalized, becoming the target of, using Minister
Coderre’s words here, ‘racial profiling and stuff like that’. The ‘stuff like that’ could take
the form of Berna Cruz’s expedited removal discussed earlier. At the time, her passport
would not have contained the contactless integrated circuit that would allow for biometric storage and identification. However, with her passport judged counterfeit and
‘funky’ by the US Customs official, coupled with the line of questioning that she was
subject to, emblematic of Hall’s ‘enunciative strategies’, would a biometric undo this
making of the body as out of place? Even when she produced other symbols of what Lyon
calls the ‘stable self ’ (her driver’s license and health card) she was still subjected to the discretionary power of the border guard. Cruz’s ordeal was further detailed in a letter she
wrote to then Prime Minister of Canada, Jean Chrétien. In that letter, Cruz cited that the
INS official told her that the photo in her passport was not hers, that ‘she eagerly wants
to be a Canadian citizen’ and was asked: ‘You’d better tell us the truth. How much did
you pay for this passport’ and ‘Are you fearful of someone back home? Is that why you
left India?’ (Cruz 2003).
For Cruz, the border was not merely a space of transit but also a space of purging. To
‘purge’ has bodily, hygienic and religious connotations, with the root of the word ‘purge’
stemming from the Latin purgare – to make pure, to cleanse of guilt, sin and impurities.
As detailed by Mark Salter, a ‘confessionary complex’ (2007) is enacted at international
border crossings where the traveller is incited to speak the truth through rites, rituals and
customs. For example, filling out customs forms, declaring goods and, among other
practices, following the directive not to joke about bombs or to tell other risky untruths.
These rites of confession and the directives in various airport pre-boarding passenger
screening zones – from the ‘no joking’ signage and the instructions obliging travellers to
purge themselves of liquids, gels and other prohibited items, to the communicating of
color coded threat advisories by way of overhead public address – all reveal the workings
of neo-pastoral power at the border. This is a power that is individualizing, beneficent and
‘essentially exercised over a multiplicity in movement’ (Foucault 2007: 125). That it is a
power mediated by new technologies of bodily surveillance that enable post-11 September
2001 mandates concerning security, marks its neo-pastoral formation. The salvivic

Browne: Digital Epidermalization

145

moment here should offer more, however, than merely having one’s shoes, belts and
sometimes laptops returned after undergoing trace detection procedures.15 The border,
where the non-sterile is said to become sterile (Fuller and Harley 2004) is a space where
certain travellers can be purged, and it is one of the sites where, I argue, the state does its
racial and gendered purging. This notion of racial purging at the border exemplifies how
certain rules and rights are only applied to some, where those who do the sorting work
(in this particular case, customs officials) ultimately dictate the outcomes of the application
of identification technologies. For Cruz, the nationalizing gaze of the border control
official sorted her into a particular category (not trusted traveller), and discounted her
Canadian passport and other identity documents by deeming them counterfeit. This case
reveals how agents of processes (in this case, the border services officers) can mediate the
application of surveillance technologies in racially specific ways, and where, as Gordon
notes, a structured violence exists in which ‘all is permitted’ (2004).

Conclusion
In his meeting with the Standing Committee, quoting James Baldwin, Canadian
Immigration Minister Denis Coderre stated: ‘an identity is questioned only when it is
menaced.’ Baldwin’s writings continue: ‘as when the mighty begin to fall, or when the
wretched begin to rise, or when the stranger enters the gates, never, thereafter, to be a
stranger: the stranger’s presence making you the stranger, less to the stranger than to
yourself ’ (1976: 80). Who is made stranger at international border crossings? Through
the usual script of confession (what is the purpose of your travel? what do you do for a
living? are you bringing any goods in with you?), and increasing procedural delays due to
anti-liquid policies, the application of trace detection technologies and secondary
security screening selection, many travellers undergo a certain amount of ontological
insecurity at the border, particularly at airports. This is an institutional site where almost
everybody is treated with suspicion at one time or another, although some may be
marked as more suspicious than others. Given this, self-making as responsible or not
risky is necessary at the border. Would a biometric passport make one more secure, more
trusted and less of a stranger?16 Importantly, would it offer a challenge to the discretionary
power of the border guard (such as that faced by Berna Cruz) or could it further enable
the racialization of risk at the border?
Understanding how biometrics are rationalized through governmental policy making
and industry specification and texts provides a means to falsify the idea that certain surveillance technologies and their application are always neutral regarding race and other
categories of determination. Examining biometric practices and surveillance in this way
is instructive and it invites us to understand the social relations and prevailing discourses
that are part of the enabling conditions of certain technologies. Where systems of
classification that rely on visual economies of race are, as Sylvia Wynter aptly puts it,
‘increasingly becoming automated’ allowing for ‘the great masses of people who have
to be cast out’ (Thomas 2006), such casting out or FTE must be attended to critically,

146

Critical Sociology 36(1)

given the privacy concerns surrounding file sharing and the current extra-constitutional
treatment of those who are deemed by the state as ‘risk’ to the state. It is at the border –
territory, epidermal and digital – a site where certain bodies are cast out and made out of
place, that a critical biometric consciousness and the possibilities suggested by what
Gilroy terms an ‘alternative, metaphysical humanism premised on face-to-face relations
between different actors – being of equal worth – as preferable to the problems of inhumanity that raciology creates’ (2000: 41) can be realized. It is precisely this casting out
that incites such a consciousness and rethinking that seeks our linked subjectivity as no
alternative, but as Fanon puts it, ‘one right alone: that of demanding human behaviour
from the other’ (1967: 229).

Acknowledgements
Special thanks go to Ben Carrington, Shoshana Magnet, Katherine McKittrick and João
Costa Vargas for their constructive comments and valuable suggestions, and to the
anonymous reviewers. I am also grateful to my dissertation committee members: Kari
Dehli, Roxana Ng, Alissa Trotz and David Lyon for their critical readings of earlier drafts
that make up parts of this article. Previous versions of this article were presented at the
April 2007 HASTAC Electronic Techtonics: Thinking at the Interface Conference at
Duke University and at the ‘Race and Citizenship’ Conference for Citizenship Studies at
Wayne State University in March 2007. I would like to thank the participants for their
comments. All shortcomings, however, are mine.

Notes
1 ‘Toonie’ is the term for the Canadian two-dollar coin.
2 The terms ‘dark matter’ and ‘white prototypicality’ are borrowed from Lewis R. Gordon’s discussion
of double consciousness (2004).
3 It is important to note Gilroy’s use of the plural form here, as it speaks to the pluralities of identity at
different spaces, locations and contexts. Further, this use of the plural exposes the fiction of this said
fixity of identity, race and other social and political constructions. Similarly, for Stuart Hall, identities
are ‘points of temporary attachments’ (1996: 6), thereby signalling the multiple ways in which identities
must be understood. In a later version of Gilroy’s essay appearing as the chapter ‘The Crisis of “Race”
and Raciology’ in Against Race: Imagining Political Culture Beyond the Color Line, the sentence reads:
‘Let me propose that the dismal orders of power and differentiation – defined by their persistent intention
to make the mute body disclose and conform to the truths of its racial identity – can be roughly
periodized’ (2000: 46). Here, ‘identity’ is singular, conforming – or not – to many truths.
4 I would also like to suggest here an understanding of ‘out of place’ as having subversive potential,
being agential. I am referring here to the term’s usage in many Caribbean contexts, such as the
Trinidadian saying ‘fast and out of place’ as being ‘intolerably impertinent’ or bold-face (Allsopp and
Allsopp 2003). Similarly, the Jamaican ‘facety’, as employed by poet Louise Bennett or ‘Miss Lou’ in
‘Independence’ (1966), speaks to acts of subversion:

Browne: Digital Epidermalization

147

Matty sey it mean we facety
Stan’ up pon we dignity,
An we don’t allow nobody
Fe teck libarty wid we.
Such obtrusiveness in ‘not knowing one’s distance’ is taken here to be a rejection of lived objectification,
and as a refusal to stay in one’s place.
5 For a detailed discussion of how skin operates as a means of social differentiation and ‘a border that
feels’, see Sara Ahmed (2000: 45).
6 See Joseph Pugliese for further discussion of FTE rates and the notion that certain biometric
technologies are ‘infrastructurally calibrated to whiteness’ (2005: 5).
7 Current technology allows for iris image capture to be ‘digitally processed into a 512 byte IrisCode®
record’. BI2 Technologies. URL (consulted 15 January 2007): http://www.bi2technologies.com/bi2technologies.html
8 For example, the Gang Intervention Network (GangNet) is a police database that compiles those
who are said to be gang members or to have gang affiliations. Developed by Irvine, California based
Orion Scientific Systems in 1991, this database allows its users to view profiles, links to associates,
vehicles, tattoos, field interviews and virtual photo line-ups. The program also includes a gang-slang
dictionary, facial recognition technology, and can make use of commercial geographic information
systems to allow for the spatial mapping of information held in the database. GangNet is presently
being used by the Toronto Police Services and by the Peel Region police force in Ontario, Canada.
9 For example, the LexisNexis partnership with the US Government using the LexisNexis developed
Accurint® Federal Information Sharing application. The LexisNexis company website boasts that
their ‘products and services will help you uncover fraudulent transactions, prevent identity theft, find
missing children, track down terrorists, prosecute white collar criminals, and make intelligent hiring
decisions’. LexisNexis. Products and Services for Risk Management. URL (consulted 10 April 2006):
http://www.lexisnexis.com/riskmanagement
10 David Theo Goldberg raised the term ‘raceless racism’ to address the example of one’s address, credit
rating and other markers influencing one’s ability to conduct internet based purchases, a vehicle for
example, with or without raced treatment on the part of the seller, such as discriminatory pricing
practices. Gender is also an important influencing marker here. ‘Technology in the Service of Humanities’
discussion on 24 August 2006 at the Seminar in Experimental Critical Theory: TechnoSpheres/FutureS
of Thinking at the University of California Humanities Research Institute, Irvine, California.
11 In the case of the permanent resident card I argue that the successful applicant is one who produces
herself as a trusted traveller, and by extension a ‘responsible immigrant’. Meaning one who can
account for employment, residences, detailed comings and goings, and who can provide a Canadian
citizen as guarantor to verify her claims. Given the particular requirements for the card, a successful
applicant must demonstrate her ability to govern her movement in a state-sanctioned manner or be
subject to a special review through the Quality Assurance Program. Applicants are required to account
for their travels outside of Canada, where only certain types of travel are sanctioned under the residency requirements, such as those while accompanied by a Canadian citizen or while in the employ
of a Canadian company. So the successful card applicant must strategize as an economic, rational actor,
for example, by venturing outside of the state only for travel that is state sanctioned and calculating
the probable consequences for travel that does not fall under that category (Browne 2005).
12 This transcription of Will Sheets’ quote is not as it appears in the original, where the transcriptionist’s
choice of matching sound to written text in an exaggerated, stereotyped vernacular, I feel, reflects the
racial logic of the time of the interview.

148

Critical Sociology 36(1)

13 However, enslaved people were able to re-purpose this brutal technology of identification by using
these violences done to the skin as means to re-establish kinship ties (see Hartman 2007). Such repurposing of branding for social networking intents reveal the limit of acts of dehumanization.
Counter practices such as this and numerous others suggest that dehumanization was not fully
achieved on an affective level.
14 For example, the Citizenship and Immigration Canada Report, Building a Nation, in advocating for
biometrics states: ‘We start with the use of photo identification, proposed as a security feature for
the new card. The first thing to note is that human beings are not particularly acute at recognizing
individuals from photograph identification, particularly across cultural lines. Moreover, glasses, hairstyles and (for men) facial hair may change, which may lead to questions even when the holder of
the card is genuine’ (2002, emphasis mine). It is interesting to note here that biometric identifiers
are suggested by the Committee as a means to solve detection problems resulting from human
beings not being acute at recognizing individuals from photographs. My argument is that what is
suggested here is that digitized body data can be worked wholesale as a technology to secure accurate
and, presumably, for fixed race and gender detection. Moreover, it is a system where it is apparently
understood that only men have facial hair.
15 Trace detection technology is used to determine, if any, the chemical signature of different types of
explosives left as residue on an individual’s body, clothing or possessions.
16 The privacy and vulnerability concerns with this technology are many. While developments in biometric encryption technology are allowing for more secure application (see Cavoukian and Stoianov
2007), large scale application of, for example, face recognition technology, are not always proven
effective (See Kosmerlj et al. 2006).

References
Ahmed, S. (2000) Strange Encounters. Routledge: London.
Allsopp, R. and Allsopp, J. (2003) Dictionary of Caribbean English Usage. University of the West Indies
Press: Cave Hill.
Baldwin, J. (1976) The Devil Finds Work, Essays. Delta: New York, NY.
Balsamo, A. (1998) Technologies of the Gendered Body: Reading Cyborg Women. Duke University Press:
Durham, NC.
Bennett, L. (1966) ‘Independence’. Jamaica Labrish: Jamaican Dialect Poems. Kingston, Jamaica: Sangter’s
Bookstore Limited.
Brown, W. (2003) Neo-liberalism and the End of Liberal Democracy. Theory and Event 7(1). URL (consulted
17 February 2006): http:/muse.jhu.edu/journals/theory_and_event/v007/7.1brown.html
Browne, S. (2005) Getting Carded: Border Control and the Politics of Canada’s Permanent Resident
Card. Citizenship Studies 9(4): 423–38.
Browne, S. (2007) Trusted Travellers: The Identity-Industrial Complex, Race and Canada’s Permanent
Resident Card. University of Toronto: (unpublished) PhD dissertation.
Cavoukian, A. and Stoianov, A. (2007) Biometric Encryption: A Positive-Sum Technology that Achieves
Strong Authentification. Security AND Privacy. Information and Privacy Commissioner/Ontario:
Toronto.
Citizenship and Immigration Canada (2002) Building a Nation: The Regulations under the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act. URL (consulted 20 October 2003): http://www.parl.gc.ca/
InfoComDoc/37/1/CIMM/Studies/Reports/cimmrp04/13-chap5-e.html

Browne: Digital Epidermalization

149

Coderre, D. (2003) Why Discuss a National Identity Card? Minister’s Speech. Appearance before the
Standing Committee on Citizenship and Immigration, 6 February 2003. URL (consulted February
2003): http://www.cic.gc.ca/english/press/speech/id-card.html
Cole, S.A. (2001) Suspect Identities: A History of Fingerprinting and Criminal Identification. Harvard
University Press: Cambridge, MA.
Cole, S. A. (2006) Brandon Mayfield, Suspect. J. Knechtel (ed.) Suspect, pp. 170–85. MIT Press:
Cambridge, MA.
Cruz, B. (2003) Letter to the Right Honourable Jean Chrétien, Prime Minister of Canada. 10 February
2003.
Fanon, F. (1967) Black Skin, White Masks. Grove Press: New York, NY.
Foucault, M. (2007) Security, Territory, Population: Lectures at the Collège de France, 1977–78. Translated
by G. Burchell. Palgrave Macmillan: New York, NY.
Fuller, G. and Harley, R. (2004) Aviopolis: A Book about Airports. Black Dog Publishing: London.
Gilroy, P. (1997) Scales and Eyes: ‘Race’ Making Difference. S. Golding (ed.) Eight Technologies of Otherness,
pp. 190–96. Routledge: London.
Gilroy, P. (2000) Against Race: Imagining Political Culture beyond the Color Line. Harvard University
Press: Cambridge, MA.
Goldberg, D.T. (1997) Racial Subjects: Writing on Race in America. Routledge: New York, NY.
Gordon, L.R. (2004) Is the Human a Teleological Suspension of Man?: Phenomenological Exploration
of Sylvia Wynter’s Fanonian and Biodicean Reflections. URL (consulted 29 March 2008):
http://web.ics.purdue.edu/~mmichau/
Hall, S. (1996) Introduction: Who Needs Identity? S. Hall and P. Du Gay (eds) Questions of Cultural
Identity, pp. 1–17. Sage: London.
Hartman, S. (2007) Lose Your Mother: A Journey along the Atlantic Slave Route. Farrar, Straus and Giroux:
New York, NY.
Kosmerlj, M., Fladsrud, T., Hjelmås, E. and Snekkenes, E. (2006) Face Recognition Issues in Border
Control Environment. D. Zhang and A.K. Jain (eds) Advances in Biometrics, pp. 33–9. Springer:
Berlin.
Lao, S. and Kawade, M. (2004) Vision-Based Face Understanding Technologies and Their Applications.
Stan Z. Li et al. (eds) Advances in Biometric Person Authentication, pp. 339–48. Springer: Berlin.
Lemke, T. (2001) The Birth of Bio-Politics: Michel Foucault’s Lecture at the Collège de France on
Neo-Liberal Governmentality. Economy and Society 20(2): 190–207.
Li, H., Zhou, M. and Geng, G. (2004) Facial Pose Estimation Based on the Mongolian Race’s Feature
Characteristic from Monocular Image. S.Z. Li et al. (eds) Advances in Biometric Person Authentication,
pp. 172–8. Springer: Berlin.
Löfgren, O. (1999) Crossing Borders: The Nationalization of Anxiety. Ethnologia Scandinavica: A Journal
for Nordic Ethnology (29): 5–27.
Lyon, D. (2001) Under My Skin: From Identification Papers to Body Surveillance. J. Caplan and
J. Torpey (eds) Documenting Individual Identity: The Development of State Practices in the Modern
World, pp. 291–310. Princeton University Press: Princeton, NJ.
Lyon, D. (2003) Technology vs. ‘Terrorism’: Circuits of City Surveillance since September 11th.
International Journal of Urban and Regional Research 27(3): 666–78.
McKittrick, K. (2006) Demonic Grounds: Black Women and the Cartographies of Struggle. University of
Minnesota Press: Minneapolis, MN.
Nanavati, S., Thieme, M. and Nanavati, R. (2002) Biometrics: Identity Verification in a Networked World.
Wiley: New York, NY.

150

Critical Sociology 36(1)

Parenti, C. (2003) The Soft Cage: Surveillance in America, from Slavery to the War on Terrorism. Basic
Books: New York, NY.
Pugliese, J. (2005) In Silico Race and the Heteronomy of Biometric Proxies: Biometrics in the Context
of Civilian Life, Border Security and Counter-Terrorism Laws. Australian Feminist Law Journal 23:
1–32.
Rankin, J. (2003) Canadian in Passport Fiasco. Toronto Star 14 February 2003: A1.
Rose, N. (1992) Governing the Enterprising Self. P. Heelas and P. Morris (eds) The Values of Enterprise
Culture: The Moral Debate, pp. 141–64. Routledge: London.
Rose, N. (1993) Government, Authority and Expertise in Advanced Liberalism. Economy and Society
22(3): 283–99.
Salter, M. (2007) Governmentalities of an Airport: Heterotopia and Confession. International Political
Sociology 1(1): 49–65.
Sperry, P. (2003) Homeland Insecurity: The Case of the ‘Funky’ Passport, Officials Say Deported Indian
Woman Falsely Claiming ‘Abuse’. World Net Daily. URL (consulted 4 November 2003): http://www.
worldnetdaily.com/news/article.asp?ARTICLE_ID=31634
Spillers, H.J. (2003) Black, White, and in Color: Essays on American Literature and Culture. University of
Chicago Press: Chicago, IL.
Standing Committee on Citizenship and Immigration (2003) Minutes of Proceedings and Evidence:
Evidence. House of Commons, 37th Parliament 2nd Session, 6 February. URL (consulted 22 April
2003): http://www.parl.gc.ca
Thacker, E. (2005) The Global Genome: Biotechnology, Politics and Culture. MIT Press: Boston, MA.
Thomas, G. (2006) Proud Flesh Inter/Views: Sylvia Wynter. Proudflesh: A New Afrikan Journal of Culture,
Politics & Consciousness 4. URL (consulted 16 October 2007): http:/www.proudfleshjournal.com/
issue4/winter.html
Valverde, M. (1996) ‘Despotism’ and Ethical Liberal Governance. Economy and Society 25(3): 357–72.
Walcott, R. (2006) Land to Light On? Mapping Reparations in a Time of Transnationality. M. Margaroni
and E. Yiannopoulou (eds) Metaphoricity in the Politics of Mobility, pp. 87–99. Rodopi: New York, NY.
Work Projects Administration (1941a) Georgia Narratives, Volume IV, Part IV. Born in Slavery: Slave
Narratives from the Federal Writers’ Project, 1936–8. URL (consulted 30 August 2009 at Manuscript
and Prints and Photographs Divisions of the Library of Congress. Washington, DC): http://memory.
loc.gov/ammem/snhtml/snhome.html
Work Projects Administration (1941b) ‘Plantation life as viewed by ex-slave Will Sheets’. Georgia
Narratives, Volume IV, Part III. Born in Slavery: Slave Narratives from the Federal Writers’ Project,
1936–8. URL (consulted 30 August 2009 at Manuscript and Prints and Photographs Divisions of the
Library of Congress. Washington, DC): http://memory.loc.gov/ammem/snhtml/snhome.html

For correspondence: Department of Sociology, University of Texas at Austin, 1 University Station
A1700, Austin, TX, USA 78702. Email: sbrowne@austin.utexas.edu

