Understanding Visual Rhetoric in Digital Writing Environments
Author(s): Mary E. Hocks
Source: College Composition and Communication, Vol. 54, No. 4 (Jun., 2003), pp. 629-656
Published by: National Council of Teachers of English
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/3594188
Accessed: 01-10-2018 16:09 UTC
REFERENCES Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article:https://www.jstor.org/stable/3594188?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a widerange of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity andfacilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available athttps://about.jstor.org/terms
National Council of Teachers of English is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve
and extend access to College Composition and Communication
This content downloaded from 157.253.50.50 on Mon, 01 Oct 2018 16:09:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
Mary E. Hocks Understanding Visual Rhetoric in Digital Writing Environments This essay illustrates key features of visual rhetoric as they operate in two professional academic hypertexts and student work designed for the World Wide Web. By looking at features like audience stance, transparency, and hybridity, writing teachers can teach visual rhetoric as a transformative process of design. Critiquing and producing writing in digital environments offers a welcome return to rhetorical principles and an impor- tant pedagogy of writing as design. Scholarship in rhetoric and composition has begun to emphasize the cen- tral role of visual rhetoric for writers, especially those working in digital writ- ing environments. Visual rhetoric, or visual strategies used for meaning and persuasion, is hardly new, but its importance has been amplified by the visual and interactive nature of native hypertext and multimedia writing. The early developers of hypertextual writing as well as the scholars who study the effect technologies have on readers and writers in various settings have all influ- enced our understanding of how multimedia technologies use visual rhetoric. Since the appearance of hypertext and other interactive new media, these digital writing environments make it difficult to separate words from visuals or privi- lege one over the other.1 Interactive digital texts can blend words and visuals, CCC 54:4/ JUNE 2003 629This content downloaded from 157.253.50.50 on Mon, 01 Oct 2018 16:09:35 UTCAll use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
CCC 54:4 / JUNE 2003 talk and text, and authors and audiences in ways that postmodern. Hypertext theorists and software designers Michael Joyce emphasized this visual and experimental character hypertextual writing when they created the hypertext Storyspace. Richard Lanham emphasized the rhetorical nature ing, defining a "digital rhetoric" that recaptures the rhetorical ing explicit oral and visual rhetorical concerns that were centuries of print culture and conventions (30). More recent outlines the rhetorical practices possible with hypertext Gary Heba's delineation of how html authoring mirrors for composition to Patricia Sullivan's arguments that expand of electronic writing to include graphics, screen design, and While professional writers rarely complete an entire interface sign, early work in professional and technical communication and Patricia Sullivan, Edward Tufte, and Barbara Mirel all rhetorical decisions impact the visual design of an online tem: this work helped alert composition scholars to the visual writing practices.3 And as Anne Wysocki demonstrates tinct," computer-based interactive media can now blend thoroughly that they are indistinguishable on the screen ful rhetorical analysis that is sensitive to audience, situation, texts, Wysocki demonstrates how new media requires a between verbal and visual meanings. This important line cism tells us that new technologies simply require new definitions consider writing. Persuaded by these arguments, many teachers of writing in print-based rhetorics now want to articulate principles for our students. We sometimes borrow elements of visual rhetoric ing image studies and design fields as well as draw more culture within which our students work, live, and learn.4 look at artifacts such as online games or Web sites, we can them to "read" critically assumptions about gender, age, identity categories. Visual communication theories, however, easy a parallel between visual grammar and verbal grammar literacy as easier or more holistic than verbal literacy.5 that these new media and the literacies they require are hybrid cal studies of writing technologies have demonstrated how 630This content downloaded from 157.253.50.50 on Mon, 01 Oct 2018 16:09:35 UTCAll use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
HOCKS / UNDERSTANDING VISUAL RHETORIC brid-it is at once verbal, spatial, and visual.6 Acknowledging means that the relationships among word and image, verbal texts, "visual culture" and "print culture" are all dialogic relationships than binary opposites.7 Recognizing the hybrid literacies our bring to our classrooms, we need a better understanding of visual and interactive rhetorical features of digital documents. nologies change, they require changes in our understanding rhetoric and, ultimately, in our writing pedagogy. With access to digital technologies increasing (or simply college writing courses, interactive digital media have increasingly of what we analyze and teach when we teach writing. Writers what Porter calls "internetworked writing"-writing that involves twining of production, interaction, and pub- lication in the online classroom or profes- I want to highlight sional workplace as well as advocating for these rhetorical one's online audiences (12). Those of us who rhetorical nature teach writing online find that we must help hybrid forms our students pay attention to the rhetorical the digital medium features of these highly visual digital environ- ments. I want to highlight the visual nature of these rhetorical versely, the rhetorical nature of these visual acts as hybrid and authoring in the digital medium of the World Wide Web. rhetoric online to our students, we can begin by carefully articulating torical features we see in various interactive digital media. we can also begin to break down the processes for creating documents, first by simply looking at the computers around them as intensely visual artifacts. The screen itself is a tablet words, interfaces, icons, and pictures that invoke other modalities and sound. But because modern information technologies construct as simultaneously verbal, visual, and interactive hybrids, digital ply assumes the use of visual rhetoric as well as other modalities. This essay defines and illustrates some key features of visual they operate in two interactive digital documents designed for Web. I first analyze features from two examples of academic says to demonstrate how visual and verbal elements work the rhetorical purposes and occasions for these publications. how writing teachers can teach visual rhetoric by discussing 631This content downloaded from 157.253.50.50 on Mon, 01 Oct 2018 16:09:35 UTCAll use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
CCC 54:4 / JUNE 2003 Critiquing and producing writing in digital students and the strategies environments actually offers a welcome ate a visually persuasive return to rhetorical principles and an impor- fective Web site for tant new pedagogy of writing as design. These examples demonstrate interactive digital media can help students develop rhetorical abilities and become more reflective authors. teaching digital rhetoric requires profound changes in how both writing and pedagogy: Critiquing and producing writing ronments actually offers a welcome return to rhetorical principles portant new pedagogy of writing as design. A visual digital rhetoric Any rhetorical theory works as a dynamic system of strategies creating, reacting to, and receiving meaning. An individual operates within multiple social and cultural contexts and, hopefully, ethically for his or her audiences. Thus, digital rhetoric describes ongoing dialogue and negotiations among writers, audiences, contexts, but it focuses on the multiple modalities available ing using new communication and information technologies. duce some key features of digital rhetoric by analyzing two scholarly by Anne Wysocki and Christine Boese. The following terms how visual rhetoric operates in digital writing environments: Audience Stance: The ways in which the audience is invited pate in online documents and the ways in which the author ethos that requires, encourages, or even discourages different interactivity for that audience. Transparency: The ways in which online documents relate lished conventions like those of print, graphic design, film, pages. The more the online document borrows from familiar tions, the more transparent it is to the audience. Hybridity: The ways in which online documents combine struct visual and verbal designs. Hybridity also encourages authors and audiences to recognize and construct multifaceted identities as a kind of pleasure. Wysocki's and Boese's texts were published on the World 1998. The last decade marked a time when academic institutions 632This content downloaded from 157.253.50.50 on Mon, 01 Oct 2018 16:09:35 UTCAll use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
HOCKS / UNDERSTANDING VISUAL RHETORIC writing began to change dramatically in their relationships to called this period the "late age of print" in 1992 to describe multimedia technologies had brought us into an era where both tal forms are important to readers (10). When these two texts 1998, academics had been increasingly exposed to hypertexts the Web) as the publication opportunities and other institutional for online academic work. Wysocki and Boese each had an interested ship and online community for their work, but each also clearly portunities to educate a wider audience of academics and strategies important for design on the Web. Readers encountering brought with them the similarly postmodern hybridity of experiences, including experiences with linear print texts, changing conventions, online communities, and a growing familiarity The authors of these documents met these readers' needs by features appropriate to a digital reading and writing environment, making concessions to the needs of their readers in a time of Although my analysis focuses on Web sites in relation to academic conventions during a particular time period, I believe can help us develop an understanding of most interactive digital change or reproduce more familiar forms. The kinds of features I offer here focus on native hypertextual writing and reading they are hardly exhaustive categories. In these two works, the up the subjects of changing literacies and the medium of the Perhaps because these two authors have some experience (though training) with digital graphic design and have taught visual they offer both an execution of visual strategies and a self-tary that is inherently instructive for a visual rhetoric-what as experimental narrative was for early narrative theory. these visual and interactive strategies in ways that are appropriate torical situation and the hypertextual medium, but they go novation to help audiences take more conscious responsibility meaning out of the text. Audiences can experience the pleasures and an awareness of themselves as constructed identities in medium. How that agency gets played out, however, depends and situation for the text in relation to the audience's need other familiar forms. 633This content downloaded from 157.253.50.50 on Mon, 01 Oct 2018 16:09:35 UTCAll use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
CCC 54:4 / JUNE 2003 Abstract Monitoring . * ~ ~ ~, ~"S - wrow sb*w book Oe Order: - r w paml - - for* bhi% teacbion ownw Viual deire, the ..k bout teu ma cpo.o. Organization of web i Web P4w. * we ar pfobkauDn bu M st n e < ou for pages, and Teaching the &., ,, nles of deign ,. . .. .- JoJ 4* JoliloB-[llold. Pi by Ame Fru1ic Wysodd T?/rohis, /nd Cily ndtxr, or i l rthttp://english.ttu.edu/kairos/ ix tKll cl. I _ _ I _ _*~,s I.ta m di_ m-: Published in the online journal Kairos <http://english.1998, Wysocki's "Monitoring Order" is intended for environments who are experienced with Web-based familiar with histories of design, the subject of her essay. This essay provides design, persuadi://eng us to be sensitive to the historical adu/kairos/3.2/index_ of oPublished in the online journal Kairos <http://english.ttu.1998, Wysoki discusses "Monitoring Order of designs tended envirom culturally framed experience with Web-based familiargns individually, based on our particular bodily ("Moan important overview of the explcontinuitieshat, because the Web inheritstween book design and Web page design, persuading s te ultural assumptions the historical and cultural specificity ofrom our currehistory with print conventions for "[V]isual designs, both book pages and Web browsers.nt in Wysocki discusses how the order of dexpressins of and the contexts for reading all come from culturally frad political structurxperienes witand such visual orderingsacy. Ware all "encounter de-to be signs individually, based ("Mon our particular bodilyer"). The histories and presents"aphy ("Monitoring Order"). She explains that, because the Web inhestrives to be transparent, we don't necesign,sarily think of it as designed or discuss the embedddcultural assumptions about order on a page that come from our history with print textal graphic design offers some guidanceas is most evident in what I've written about books) be expressions of and means for reproducing cultural and political structures, and ... such visual orderings are likely to be those that are repeated...." ("Monitoring Order"). The history of typography demonstrates that, because book design strives to be transparent, we don't necessarily think of it as designed or discuss the embedded assumptions about reading. Two-dimensional graphic design offers some guidance for designing Web pages but is also limited in its formalism. Ultimately, Wysocki wants read- ers to ask themselves "what the arrangement of images and words on a web 634This content downloaded from 157.253.50.50 on Mon, 01 Oct 2018 16:09:35 UTCAll use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
HOCKS / UNDERSTANDING VISUAL RHETORIC page asks us to desire: what order is reinforced by a design, and give us chances to re-order?" ("Monitoring Order"). The Web, while from both print and graphics design traditions, lends itself to looking the digital texts and pages whose structures and margins can change. argument and visual strategies work together to motivate readers their ways of seeing design. Audience stance describes how the work visually gives readers of agency and possibilities for interactive involvement. Wysocki's visually by enacting in the interface the concepts about design it discusses while constructing the screen as page. The ethos created addresses the expected academic conventions for linear argument challenges those expectations. Wysocki, an experienced designer tive media, originally delivered this piece at the Computers and ference, and she kept it within the linear format when designing this talk into an essay for Kairos.8 The ethos When "Monitoring Order" appeared in September addresses 1998, Kairos as a whole averaged 137,000 hits with conventions 7,500 unique visitors per month, while today it aver- also challenges ages 240,000 hits and 10,000 unique visitors per month.9Most direct involvement between this audience and the author in 1998 occurred in forms prescribed by the journal-the linear Web-text structure, the "Contact the author" e-mail link, and the discussion forum included in another section of the journal. But Wysocki uses the interface and the tone of her essay to create arguments using pages of texts and illustrations readers are familiar with, while subtly making readers construct a reading and a way of seeing the essay. She thus fulfills, and also plays with, the desire for ordered readings, using the essay itself to challenge the audience while also giving them the linearity they might want or even need. The essay is divided into sections, or nodes, and the length of text in each node varies, but tiles in the upper frame allow readers to access the nodes, which are subsections of the argument, in any order. Each node can be read autonomously but also works to develop the overall argument of the essay. Some screens require scrolling to find all the examples; some screens are short, emphatic transitional and summary paragraphs. The final tile brings up the anticipated list of sources. The shape of each section thus develops and stresses points of the argument for readers familiar with academic arguments but also familiar with basic Web conventions like scrolling and clicking on buttons. If one clicks on a tile to navigate through the piece, subtle changes on the screen 635This content downloaded from 157.253.50.50 on Mon, 01 Oct 2018 16:09:35 UTCAll use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
CCC 54:4 / JUNE 2003 indicate movement through the document and reinforce of agency and interaction. The design of the essay invites yond the familiar linear structure, to playfully reflect on linear structure. Readers are offered the pleasure of consciously order" themselves by clicking on tiles and pursuing different read or re-read the essay. By creating this kind of interactive stance, Wysocki reminds readers of themselves as active readers be attentive to the features of design on the page. For readers to access its graphics and frames, the essay offers an interactive where color, shape, and text cannot be separated. The interface readers with a renewed sense of how design choices become arguments, in this case about the changes in page and book out history. Transparency refers to how the writer designs a document miliar and clear to readers. Wysocki demonstrates how screen new media document might use strategies borrowed from approaches to page design, graphic design, and the changing as frames) for Web pages. "Monitoring Order" uses forms, page layout to create a fairly transparent interface that quickly ice reader how to navigate it, relying primarily on repeated visual tools of organization: I The wrinef conceving the page rray siructuraly corrpose each wlh the sarre care as s gven lo the sentences and paragraphs conlained theref -Srrlh Text In the Book Forrrarl ' il When we ask people n our classes to wrte lor the web we enlarge what we rrean by' corposton - None ot us are unaware o( the viusaty of the Web of how thal nl. delaul. neutral grey has a ddlerent blankness than typmg-paper whie. ot how rrargns and spacngs between Ihes requre rore thought and action. o how the sze ol the web page can be so dllerent trorr the soe ol the paper one-and of how color and mrage (and anrrabon and sound) are not at al unusual In this wrang I consader how those of us whose Lves have been concerned wth the corrposon ol words and words alone. rright set about helpng people n our classes thnk crtcaly about corrposng wdh words and rrages and how that composlional orderng affects our senses od ourselves and each other I aer gong to look at two polenbal sources tor help an ordenng the visual on the web. wtbngs about book design and wrfngs about oorposio n n art theory Both se(s of wrtags grve re problers. but out ol those problers cor directions I think worth tolowng 636This content downloaded from 157.253.50.50 on Mon, 01 Oct 2018 16:09:35 UTCAll use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
HOCKS / UNDERSTANDING VISUAL RHETORIC Wysocki provides navigation through the text with the sequence tiles in the top frame. The tiles are different colors that correspond tions of the essay-blues for the sections on book design, reds for on graphic design, and greens for the introduction and conclusion. ors are repeated in the opening figure of the quill feather, an antiquated image of writing's material history represented on screen. The quotations, subheadings, and reading instructions appear different colored text that stands out typographically. The feather graphic representing the subsection-here, a single green tile node-appear at the top left of the main frame to orient the printed page. The bottom of this first page instructs us to click move through the paper. In this same location on subsequent are repeated as a set of lines at the bottom of each screen so that ally identify the end of a section by its corresponding tiles. The navigational device and a kind of footprint of each screen. The screen are thus decorative and interactive, painterly, and significant tations for information. The screen is visually coherent primarily strategy of repetition-here, the use of repeated colors and forms. face, this coherence provides a calm sense of modernist order neously visual and navigational. Order reassures readers that lost and that the text has a structure that can be tracked visually verbally. The hybridity of the Web medium refers to the interplay between the visual and the verbal in one constructed, heterogeneous semiotic space. Wysocki's site takes advantage of this hybridity to combine pictures and text in thoughtful and unconventional ways. The sections of text incorporate quotes and pictures and reproductions of texts as evidence for the arguments about visual design and its historical specificity. This strategy uses the juxtaposition of pictures, words, and unconventional margins to transform our understand- ing of the visual through the reading experience. For example, in the following screen, Wysocki plays with the conventional relationships between texts and pictures on pages: the margins expand outward slightly on the left, reminding readers of how the digital page is not fixed but mutable. The illustration, a pictorial history book, is a startling example of how the production of such books served as an excuse for political oppression by conquerors who valued only verbal texts. Finally, the illustration is placed within the sentence without figure captions in the same way that verbal evidence supporting an argument might be: 637This content downloaded from 157.253.50.50 on Mon, 01 Oct 2018 16:09:35 UTCAll use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
CCC 54:4 / JUNE 2003 Hefe a p9ag des$gn bong asAd to odte our idatud lowrfds othet I tOow &rh n #t&l xiarpie of how in design of book oda s us towrtds ceine desrs and expatdOlsft. Odses and eapBClabns de<veoped Whnough the ttbon oln p lap s"g pag* atta pag9 of wtrnm dagnW Waltf D Mgnolo rn 'Lilcy and tht Coontlabon of MIror'y - deCs ethi wihn tUh Spnnids coloeaad 4 tXKo ltay wrt n o U cuut n e tha phabe th l a hat te y coutd not st ttat th Mnce had any sws o0 hatoty the MsiCa ecotd<d thtr pasts not wIh lf*s and wods bul nathWr cfrtan knds od panngs (wtach thy often bound togther nto bookL4k obfclI&- -and the Spanrds cons*quently consdt*d tht MUtc to b ba rbinnsr 97 and destroy d so rany of thc books- tht onl ty trrot(man (Kng 102) HFn* a anoathe #xrnpte Contanc* Clswn I WoWn dof ae: Epadh Sea Einxplo I u H wy Across Crtarw dsrbes an anoadt nt the Spanash coloniaton of Ih Inca whose coswrotogy rtad on htnng Ith Spnash post Wccorp nyingg the *xpon gave a bke( suarrry o Chton docldme dnouncod Inca rgwon as Unveed by tho v and dtir nrd d that Acahap ftho Inca leaden i e ay h inbecotr In* vasal o aIth Holy Roiran Ernpero Whay gvng h ddt a h prest hld a booa ous|~lty inth? Bolw o a breary n one hatnd Asrhu ea d(ll naded fby tas spoch wr"otI der randed ol the prst by wihat attor ho rrade thse ctrr Thi ah held up eh boo to ti o n to g uAlshuaph aexarnd I but as i said nouthigto hrn he droptd to tht gound Ths recion o thoe esnce of Europ*an cattwiteW the xcus th e Spanth needbd to betxn theo raersaa I "t Because lenge this ously work, tions tions, can imagine designers sTmon b m hIaea" namMM i U OE IN:~ i XMlM mdell?eL I The Ballad of the Intemet Nutball: Chaining Rhetorical Visions from the Margins of the Margins to the Mainstream in the Xenaverse By CMBslw neBos Fr This sscnact o s juio or portl lIo t? cyterspca-basoe hrtual wnai caked re "xe'nhr,rse so named bcdauss co1 it asasoCiaon wti ns vaort-vde synacatedA te'Wson oIpOcarm -xen Warno Pnrnoess Trh xenasrSe c anot b co lnOrd tyh s Ossertaon Cto Ons prolect seews to btr es rnwge on Ih* aebt-d xen~ve$e cuv.e In c(erspac To earn abot e r-- --.http://www. nutball.com/dissertation/ x.htm * http://www.nutball.com/dissertation/index.htm 638This content downloaded from 157.253.50.50 on Mon, 01 Oct 2018 16:09:35 UTCAll use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
HOCKS / UNDERSTANDING VISUAL RHETORIC Self-published and updated since 1998, Christine Boese's "The Internet Nutball" was the first hypertextual dissertation accepted Polytechnic University. Boese's project is a participant/observer and analysis of the fans and online culture surrounding the television show, Xena: Warrior Princess. The original audiences included the dissertation committee members and the Xena fans. Boese ex- plains the goal in her dissertation is to explore the constellations of social forces in cyberspace, which have led to the success of a noncommercial, highly trafficked, dynamic culture or what is some- times, called a "community." ... This research examines how the rhetorical vi- sions of this culture are used to write the narratives of its ongoing existence, in a way that is increasingly independent of the dominant narratives of the television program itself. Boese's ethnographic project analyzes show episodes, photographs, fan- authored fantasy narratives about the implicit lesbian subplot between Xena and her warrior-poet sidekick Gabrielle, surveys, and more than 1,100 Web sites devoted to the show and its fans online, and face-to-face interactions at fan conventions. This comprehensive study of a fan culture, or fandom, offers fresh definitions of both online community and hypertextual structure. The audience stance is established on the opening screen as music, im- ages, text, and hypertextual structure all set the stage for a highly interactive experience. With the freedom to design her own interface and the support of committee members to explore new techniques for hypertextual structure, Boese created a complex collage of visual and navigational strategies. Similarly, the The ethos Boese creates is at once that of kinds of agency presented to readers are engaged insider, co-participant, and scholarly complex and multifaceted, allowing many investigator, one that assumes an engaged choices for interaction, including several online audience of fans. ways to read the document. The ethos Boese creates is at once that of engaged insider, co-participant, and scholarly investi- gator, one that assumes an engaged online audience of fans. She emphasizes these multiple stances by providing equal amounts of narrative, analysis, per- sonal reflection, and interaction. The familiar academic contexts for a disser- tation, including title page and acknowledgments, are included as links from this first screen, as well as a traditional table of contents. But this document actively invites participation from those whom Boese calls in her acknow- ledgements "my co-authors" of the study, the fan audience for the site. These 639This content downloaded from 157.253.50.50 on Mon, 01 Oct 2018 16:09:35 UTCAll use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
CCC 54:4 / JUNE 2003 co-participants not only completed the expected surveys and they have added online materials and interpretations to the site Boese thus creates an experience of open-ended possibility with erating texts and interpretations. When it first appeared on the saw about 500 visits a month by these fans, but it continues to amount of traffic-up to 22,200 hits and 6,155 unique visitors time of this study. Its audience has apparently grown as academics journals have referenced Boese's study as a cult fan site and a course Like Wysocki's visual strategies, Boese's are integral to her this case to motivate and engage readers in the complex web teractions that make up the online culture called the Xenaverse. face design is not very transparent, offering instead an multidimensional structure that includes complex linking and of navigation: to under andUVs space The oumey bees APth a sugle - Hlrohn~~~~~~hn A. * node.. bouadun za W40delialcon rwion oehsL~aha dieuu her oI.laedoco bad thouagh Ml*n nd ertu~. anoo bot IN-*%* r"Wa4ft I-to Muk"a6..Wo cha.e,. n kod o WOtgou0 tahe sa hr*C 9ca, - to creals a schoLury tont"'M InAhs VA The Mad~ of the Internet Nu*&$: The Xenrmem I CLybrnsptl c opy-gm 1998 ete8te , An-~ ~ ~ J RlOOMS h,Iaoo ot o,oo rod. 0 pha sso. sotado . otd voo cOps w# th of MCAAJrues StIdos. aad aeppsOsh,o# do, ef t socatlonal use II ~~~~~~*ed~~~~~~miks~ ~ ~~"I Boese's interface takes full advantage of nonlinear hypertextual form by using multiple frames, linking strategies, and multiple media in ways that draw at- tention to the constructed interface. Boese provides three frames, four naviga- tional paths, and an image map to accommodate many kinds of readers. The use of three simultaneous frames in the screens gives an experience of nonhierarchical depth and multidimensionality to the screen space. Each frame is marked by a different color-blue at the top, pink at the side, and white in the middle-and the screen is assembled as a collage of contrasting colors, 640This content downloaded from 157.253.50.50 on Mon, 01 Oct 2018 16:09:35 UTCAll use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
HOCKS / UNDERSTANDING VISUAL RHETORIC photographs, and links within the text and at the right margins appears organized by its graphical and spatial presentation in texts also interact with one another to a great degree. Hypertextual clicked, bring up explanations and citations in the other frames tional pop-up windows. Thus, one experiences many changes through this cross-linking on what appears to be one level of ating what Janet Murray refers to as an experience of immersion increased agency (162). To enhance that agency and also offer concessions to more ers, Boese uses several methods of navigation that provide through the text. The picture of Gabrielle, the poet, leads to ing of the text. The sword, one of Xena's weapons, moves one tative theoretical portion of the text, while Xena's other weapon, Shockrum, leads to a pop-up window that provides the image collage of photos offering a nonlinear path through the document. picture of Xena leads to a discussion of interconnecting themes At every turn, then, readers are offered mul- tiple choices, allowing them to construct Readers experience very different readings of the text. At the this text and other same time, readers experience a dissonance fantasy narratives between this text and other familiar forms that defamiliarizes (like linear fantasy narratives or academic print narrative, arguments) that defamiliarizes their expe- even with other, riences with print narrative, argumentative forms, and even with other, simpler hypertexts. This process what Bolter and Grusin call "hypermediation," because the historical ship of media forms becomes apparent in the structure. In she explains in her section on design, is to create what Joyce tive hypertext," thereby encouraging audiences to actively construct readings and meanings (42-43). Boese's readers are highly aware face as a Web-based, experimental structure that bears little print forms. The hybridity of the Web interface allows Boese to swap of media-texts, pictures, sounds, links, data sources, and out of the various sections of the screen and pop up windows. textual explanations with purely visual arguments. For example, representation of the Xenaverse- 641This content downloaded from 157.253.50.50 on Mon, 01 Oct 2018 16:09:35 UTCAll use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
CCC 54:4 / JUNE 2003 Map of the Xenaverse fMap of the Xenaverse, Ne.AO,"~~~ce-emiecisi,b:I. eb S.. . . U,~ ,~ ~. ~ ......................................... :..3 .q WM XXseswat teufte weudb cllafatife t tesenta le Wamotef ta n t inwesAy , wt co .in 0th dta b f or >S data,highligtedheadings,use ofwhitespacWt pt aMt b;wt~LP~c~(~ lest~terete cue t Ate tf ad s tt eele gSiiteer a limportar htrcl fs from ?lic ti of thSe es colcumnsregularentsizrt,he e staWhe aadislan ma n y offoreri harea common toanytwo-dimferentsional dsignt(atig nty and clustengo siilargl fr ithe auther drepthn and d thos od t onneco tie wanito observ that hncor noncomercal itnds o fiesoded ptinmb rEd atom r tcui ustes h intyelwal- amount of data on a single level, with colors distinguishing the data (blue for columns regulariziate n thedata. ile displ a nd cnstructo the s r teleristics -seerwhal importa rhuetoricl fea tufreso emregfe fo looking" at beth of thes common to any two-dimensional esign (alignment and clusterin of similar data, highlighted headings, use of white space), the page asks readers to ap- preciate the depth and breadth of the online communities and to observe that noncommercial siteso coded blue outnumbered commercial sites in yellow al- most two to one. Readers, by grasping the scope of the Xenaverse and immers- ing themselves in the many sites and media included in the project, can help create the fan culture and construct themselves as fans, critics, or storytellers as they see fit. Several important rhetorical features emerge from looking at both of these documents. First, each piece establishes an audience stance by offering read- ers different forms of interactivity and agency. This stance results largely from the author creating an ethos and a connection with readers that encourages different kinds of audience participation. Each author thus useesthe interac- tive and performative potential of the hypertextual medium, encouraging the audience to explore the space created by the digital document and to reflec- tively participate in their own exploration and construction of the text. Sec- ondly, each piece uses formal structures that mix old and new forms of reading and viewing conventions to create the audience's perception of transparency. The document's historical relationship to familiar conventions helps create a sense of familiar structure and allows the audience to recognize desired infor- 642This content downloaded from 157.253.50.50 on Mon, 01 Oct 2018 16:09:35 UTCAll use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
HOCKS / UNDERSTANDING VISUAL RHETORIC mation quickly. Transparency is also created by defamiliarizing experiences with reading and writing conventions by drawing sometimes playful attention to both the discontinuities and the between older and newer forms of reading, writing, and viewing This process can allow the audience to experience the pleasure ing their own readings and playing with form. In the two examples, ments make concession to and also disrupt the expectations readers accustomed to traditional print and other media forms, but in quite different ways In a space where appropriate to the rhetorical context. Finally, can be constructed, each author uses the hybridity of the digital performed, this medium to capitalize on its constructed na- works to the audience's ture and also to encourage readers to be aware increasing the of their own hybrid identities. In a space where through identification multifaceted identities can be constructed, experienced, and even performed, this experience of hybridity audience's advantage by increasing the experience of pleasure fication and multiplicity. Although they obviously overlap, these categories provide a starting for talking about the rhetorical and visual features of Web-based ments together, the contexts for designing these documents ments, and the potential impact of these designs on audiences, through the use of interface designs and interactivity. Both hypertextual form to underscore reflexively the arguments they conventions and about cultures. Both authors use the visual interactive me- dium to persuade their audiences to participate in and be changed by the read- ing experience. "Monitoring Order" uses academic readers' expectations about linearity and visual page design in a traditional "page" format and then subtly challenges those conventions using page designs and pictures as self-explana- tory pieces of evidence to embody Wysocki's arguments about the historical specificity of all designs. Boese's dissertation immerses readers in a multidi- mensional structure that disrupts expectations about linearity up front but still provides many choices that lead to a linear path. The invitations to par- ticipate and be transformed by the online Xena cultures abound, driven by the agency offered to readers throughout the document. Analyzing professional models like these helps us demonstrate good techniques for how multimedia writing can then be taught as visual and verbal rhetorical practice. 643This content downloaded from 157.253.50.50 on Mon, 01 Oct 2018 16:09:35 UTCAll use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
CCC 54:4 / JUNE 2003 Teaching visual digital rhetoric When we bring an understanding of digital rhetoric to our rooms, we need to expand our approach not only to rhetorical also to text production. Digital technologies can encourage what don School theorists call a multimodal approach to literacy, munication technologies engages students in a multisensory active construction of knowledge. To use multimedia technologies writers have to use practices that are not just verbal but visual, and gestural to make meaning (Cope and Kalantzis 26; Kress, 182). These theorists make a powerful case for redefining literacy attending to the political and social impact made possible by complex artifacts that can help transform our lived experience. to pedagogy suggests that students can work from within tures and multiple identities using their own languages as well day lived experiences to design new kinds of knowledge. This literacy and its implications for teaching echo what Cynthia "critical technological literacy" in its recognition of the political of technological literacies and its commitment to diversity. literacy education reinforces the value of teaching students selves not just as critics but as designers of knowledge. Gunther guishes how critique and design are two knowledge-making manifest different social environments and We must offer students experiences both temologies. Critique in the analytic process of critique, which forms, and the social relations scrutinizes conventional expectations manifestations, are subjected and power relations, and in the transfor- analytical scrutiny to mative process of design, which can constitution ... In periods change power relations by creating a stability critique has the new vision of knowledge. ing a dynamic into the system" Design becomes essential in times of intense social change: "While critique looks at the present through production, Design shapes the future through deliberate deployment sentational resources in the designer's interest" (77). In other moves us from rhetorical criticism to invention and production. ing" of resources gives students' work social and political them to learn how to represent new forms of knowledge. anced rhetorical approach, then, we must offer students experiences the analytic process of critique, which scrutinizes conventional 644This content downloaded from 157.253.50.50 on Mon, 01 Oct 2018 16:09:35 UTCAll use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
HOCKS / UNDERSTANDING VISUAL RHETORIC
and power relations, and in the transformative process of change power relations by creating a new vision of knowledge.
In terms of visual rhetoric, students need to learn the of how to critique the saturated visual and technological surrounds them as something structured and written in a rhetorical moves. They then need to enact those visual moves Kress's notion of multimodal design helps to underscore how projects can be for learning visual rhetoric. If we can teach students the rhetorical and visual features of professional hypertexts-stance, presentations of ethos, transparency of the interface the hybridity of forms and identities-we can also teach them own technological artifacts that use these strategies but are or activist in nature. This approach to pedagogy asks teachers new kinds of texts into our classrooms but new kinds compositional processes that ask students to envision and create that perhaps does not yet exist.
To illustrate the transformative process of design, I want to online project from a Shakespeare course at Spelman College, in 1998 when many students were designing their first 645
This content downloaded from 157.253.50.50 on Mon, 01 Oct 2018 16:09:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
CCC 54:4 / JUNE 2003 ments.1" The project focused on collecting professional and on colorblind casting in Shakespeare performances. The class came an ongoing collaboration and a new experience for the and the students. The professor explains that she hoped "test their own ideas against those of a wide variety of people the study of Shakespeare" and "express their opinions to their own school environment" (McDermott 2). She gave colorblind casting, used by theaters to create more diversity ater, and cited the controversies regarding these casting then identified key arguments about race and collected professional online to create the first Web site that explicitly addresses practices in Shakespearean studies. They constructed an activist their identities as individual Black women and as a Students became designers of Spelman College community. Furthermore, publishing knowledge about Shakespeare their work online highlighted the students' perceived im- by weaving together and pact on audiences and underscored the rhetorical ethics visually representing their own of internetworked writing emphasized by Porter. Students perspectives and the perspec- became designers of knowledge about Shakespeare by tives of others on the Web. weaving together and visually representing their own per- spectives and the perspectives of others on the Web. On the page, these voices become enacted as a visual a mix of colored text, com- mercial and homemade visuals, seriousness and fun, as the students explain the occasion for their site and the controversies surrounding their topic, ask- ing, "Should Non-European Actors Be Cast in Major Roles?" To construct the project, the students used audience stance to offer an engaging site with a layout and tone that would appeal to other students study- ing Shakespeare while also being responsible to the professionals with whom they had been communicating. The site includes interactive and inviting fea- tures that students designed specifically for other students. For example, the "guestbook" link visually marks a place where the students invite other stu- dents to respond to this controversial topic. Quotes in the guestbook compli- ment the students' work on the site, including a supporting quote by actor Raul Julia on his Shakespearean role. A student from another school wrote a deliberately informal note of recognition: "well i think that casting blacks and other colors into Shakespeare's work is very essential. as a student studying his arts i enjoyed acting out the parts that would of been issued to a white person. colorblindness is a great approach because then all can feel into the theme and not left out. thank for your time and god bless." While few in number, 646This content downloaded from 157.253.50.50 on Mon, 01 Oct 2018 16:09:35 UTCAll use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
HOCKS / UNDERSTANDING VISUAL RHETORIC
these responses enhanced the class's sense of audience and the site.l2
Another way students designed interactivity was to create they could publish the ideas they collected from surveys. Students playful feature of a "thought bubble," an inherently visual/verbal borrowed from comic book traditions, to represent their audience and their opinions culled from the surveys. Each thought an opinion in its own unique color and a sense of incompleteness in the title's ellipsis:
Students use these familiar forms to represent meaning and professionals. The Spelman site works rhetorically into a dialogue about Shakespeare and race though its simple interface while also presenting research on the topic of Shakespeare their responsibilities as researchers. By keeping these audience relatively separate, students hoped to persuade both audiences of colorblind casting. The students create an ethos of the their class community that strikes a balance between professional discourse and authoritative self-identification, what Stephen about online projects by students from the same college, calls 647
This content downloaded from 157.253.50.50 on Mon, 01 Oct 2018 16:09:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
CCC 54:4 / JUNE 2003
bodiment online"(238). For example, on the next screen, the the "unanswered questions" they have and cite Errol Hill, scholar, as an authority, before they announce the purpose The clash between personal voice and professional discourse the same kind of "double-consciousness" that Knadler saw in his students'
portfolios and that teachers often find in students working to assimilate
personal voices with distanced and objective academic discourse:
Students used a variety of familiar techniques to create a transparent
interface appropriate for their rhetorical situation and for the audience. Keeping
the site simple and straightforward for multiple audiences was a primary
goal for the class as they were learning Web design. They use basic and familiar
conventions for the Web at that time-linear arrangements and horizontal
rules on pages, traditional book-style layout of pictures alongside text, and
short nodes of explanatory text to help keep readers oriented. Students avoided
using frames or other more complex hypertextual linking, opting instead for a
few conventional in-text links. The pages use these familiar conventions but
still take some advantage of the digital medium to go beyond traditional printpage
format. Prompted by the idea of color, the students use multicolored text
to provide a visual pun and argument to remind audiences that color is indeed
visible. Students also playfully invite readers to explore the thoughts of others
with the thought bubbles. The page is deceptively simple: It has a depth of
e. :
Students u a e f lt q ir a o t r ir a
i i and straightforwar for mu
goal fortheclass a
iar; ~ conventions f W hl rt i
Students used a variety of familiar techniques to create a interface appropriate for their rhetorical situation and for the the site simple and straightforward for multiple audiences iar conventions for the Web at that time-alinear arrangements rules on pages, traditional book-style layout of pictures alongside with the thought bubbles. The page is deceptively simple: It 648
This content downloaded from 157.253.50.50 on Mon, 01 Oct 2018 16:09:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
HOCKS / UNDERSTANDING VISUAL RHETORIC
resources offered through the few hypertextual links here, results linked to the "Thoughts of Others" box, a link to sites, and a link to a class bulletin board with pictures, news, ongoing productions.
While these pages appears "messy" in that they have less onscreen spatial structure, and interface features than examples, they illustrate the process of students learning verbal arguments together. The text on this
page aims to balance opinions objectively, While these pages using black text for the opening summary they have less and green text for their explicit purpose in spatial structure, making the site, thus establishing a firm than the professional sense of the class community as the occa- illustrate the process sion for this design. At the same time, com- bring visual and mercial pictures with captions alongside
them open the page and emphasize depictions of familiar Black recent productions. Blue links lead to other issues from the on the topic. The students thus build a visual argument about of successful casting practices through the pictures as they They then work to balance perspectives and research The hybridity of the medium thus lets students use texts, pictures, illustrations interchangeably to illustrate their learning and engagement and responses from their dual audiences of students professionals. Students can take on the role of offering professional and still be students.
If we understand this site as epistemic rhetoric (see James Berlin), it demonstrates
how students can make their ongoing work and learning purposeful
by directing it toward this particular situation and their audience of both professionals
and students. By publishing it online as public discourse and new
knowledge in the field, students have an immediate sense of their impact on
audiences. The "Shakespeare in Color" Web site "makes an actual contribution
to Shakespeare studies" while teaching students "investigative technique,
analytical skills, and something about the process of publishing and taking
responsibility for one's scholarly work" (McDermott 4). It thus becomes an
authentic learning experience that has brought students in touch with a new
experience of literature, of performance, and of theater culture through contact
with their broader audience of professionals. Students themselves recognized
the value of these activities and described their projects as "extremely
649
This content downloaded from 157.253.50.50 on Mon, 01 Oct 2018 16:09:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
CCC 54:4 / JUNE 2003
creative," and including "alternate ways" of representing their of the course material. Most importantly, students were extremely their accomplishments, saw themselves as talented, and appreciated the
"hands-on learning" and the opportunity to
Design projects such as this not only bring present their work in a public forum for an
the concept of multiliteracy squarely into actual audience.13 Design projects such as this
the middle of the composition process but not only bring the concept of multiliteracy
also help students design an activist squarely into the middle of the composition
academic project that represents new process but also help students design an acknowledge
for a real audience. tivist academic project that represents new
knowledge for a real audience.
How do we begin to help students enact their understanding of visual
and digital rhetoric? Teachers must first develop assignments and projects that
complement the goals of their courses. In this case, the professor wanted a
multimodal experience of literary texts, interactions with professionals, and
collaborative active learning experiences using multimedia technology. After
these students looked critically at the visual elements of Web sites and other
media, they then planned out their project together and designed the site for
their two audiences. Students created a Web site and a PowerPoint project in
this course and presented their preliminary designs in an oral presentation to
other students and faculty from the department. When teaching design, I also
begin by analyzing media and encouraging students to think broadly about
visual elements and interactivity. I show them published new media titles and
ask them to look for the rhetorical features like audience stance, ethos, transparency
of the interface, and hybridity. They come to understand these features
by analyzing the visual details: the use of elements like color, space,
linearity; the use of conventions from film, print, advertisements, and typical
Web sites; and the use of forms of agency for audiences. Students then draw
conclusions about visual arguments and the purposes of interactivity. I have
them sketch out or illustrate "borrowed" features they'd like to include in their
projects. I do this so they will not limit their designs to their own production
skills or to the technologies available at any one time in our classrooms. My
students conduct research by starting with their own understandings of visual
representations and their own perspectives as users of familiar and not-sofamiliar
technologies. This process of speculative design encourages students
to think both creatively and rhetorically about everything from cell phones to
online games, while paradoxically not limiting them to the time and place of
particular software programs.
650
This content downloaded from 157.253.50.50 on Mon, 01 Oct 2018 16:09:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
HOCKS / UNDERSTANDING VISUAL RHETORIC
The next step is to teach students to map out or storyboard Storyboarding is a visual technique borrowed from documentary where every shot is planned out to correspond to a multimedia productions, storyboarding refers to planning each screen of the digital production. To teach students the storyboarding I give them sheets of paper and ask them to draw every each navigational link, and all text that appears on the screen. the colors and any other graphics that will be used on each makes them pay careful attention to visual arguments, on the screen, and to the consistency of the interface. to narrow the scope of their projects in collaboration with their audience. They think carefully about what
the audience will see and how audience members When students will interact with the information in their projects. sequence When students learn to storyboard a sequence of carefully screens, they learn to think carefully about how gets structured visual information gets structured as part of the
design. Their design and drawing skills can be minimal because teaches students to think through the elements of design and meet the audience's needs. The speculative design process can in a couple of weeks, and students don't need any specific complete the assignments. I sometimes go on and teach students and an image software program that allows them to alter still image and change its meaning. If time permits, students create their own graphics and import them into a Web authoring be combined with links and other interactive features. This project can take more weeks to accomplish, but it is well worth effort if the ultimate goal is to have students publish a permanent Students in the Shakespeare class benefited from interacting audience online and in oral presentations to other students how to design the content of the site. The oral critique of students is a very important part of the process-not only compelled to impress their audience of peers, but they also to revise their site before making it accessible online.
While this discussion offers only a starting point for teaching shows how valuable all stages of design projects can be for projects require writers to look at successful models, to think audience, to design visual and verbal arguments together, and 651
This content downloaded from 157.253.50.50 on Mon, 01 Oct 2018 16:09:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
CCC 54:4 / JUNE 2003
struct new knowledge. Because the process of design is fundamentally and multimodal, it can be challenging, but it leads students of how designed spaces and When designing digital documents and also tifacts impact audiences. seeing how people use and interpret them, our allowed these students students can then see themselves as active social and cultural producers of knowledge in their discipline. they found themselves research and their own perspectives
online to define a concept of English Studies. Nancy and Technology"), Craig Stroupe ("Visualizing English") and and Archive") have all demonstrated that the design of artifacts part of literacy and of enacting disciplinary knowledge in those artifacts will ultimately determine how knowledge perpetuated for our field. When designing digital documents how people use and interpret them, our students can then active producers of knowledge in their discipline.
Acknowledgments
I am grateful to Marilyn Cooper, Gary Bays, and the CCC reviewersfor comments on this article. Special thanks to Jeff Grabillfor his insights throughout the revision process. Thanks also to Chris McDermott, and Anne Wysocki for their contributions to Spelman students who allowed me to discuss their course work.
Notes
1. At the time that the hypertext theorists developed theories about electronic
writing in the 1980s, they were primarily referring to elements of early hypertextual
systems and the interactions in online communication before widespread use of
graphical browsers on the World Wide Web. The early hypertext theorists focused
immediately on both the visual and spatial character of electronic writing. For
example, Jay Bolter defined the new writing technologies as "the visual writing
space" (11) and outlined how they require a new visual literacy. Nancy Kaplan explained
that "hypertextual writing systems [could] provide a graphic representation
of textual structures, a dynamic map of the textual system in play" that "remain
dynamic pictures of an evolving text." ("E-Literacies"). Michael Joyce highlighted
Bolter's description of hypertext as "topographic writing" that implied its
visual quality (47) and stated eloquently: "hypertext is, before anything else, a visual
form" (19).
652
This content downloaded from 157.253.50.50 on Mon, 01 Oct 2018 16:09:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
HOCKS / UNDERSTANDING VISUAL RHETORIC
2. See, for example, Lester Faigley on the postmodern composing Landow on the connections between hypertext and postmodern and Nancy Baym on the conversational features of online discourse. Moulthrop and Peter Elbow on the postmodern forms of rhizome hypertext and for home pages. Hypertext seems to embody postmodern writing, as Jane Yellowlees Douglass states: "The beauty of hypertext propels us from the straightened 'either/or' world that print has and into a universe where the 'and/and/and' is always possible" 3. James Porter and Patricia Sullivan's early collaborative essay ends emphasis on the visual challenges of electronic text (422). Barbara how database design has become an essential part of the workplace and includes a "visual rhetoric" for effective data Edward Tufte describes a successful computer interface parallelism and clustering of images that allows "visual user. In two practical guides for authors, Domenic Stansberry guidelines for writers that designing content for new media focuses design-the structure and flow of information pathways Schriver includes chapters on interactive document design.
4. Not surprisingly, useful connections have been made between and the visual arts as mutually reinforcing literacies in the classroom Hobson, and Mullin). Theories for analyzing visual communication have been highlighted in cross-disciplinary studies of culture example, the collections The Visual Culture Reader and Design design discourse has been shown by Richard Buchanan as rhetoric, drawing on the past and showing possibilities in everyday objects (107). Hanno Ehses analyzes the visual rhetoric posters, pointing out how the design medium of the poster verbal" representation as the "structure itself becomes semiotic, two forms contains information over and above that pertaining (193). The collection Page to Screen (Snyder) is a good example scholarship that looks at the design processes involved in digital 5. For examples of these parallels, see Michael Gibson and Donis of these approaches to visual literacy and visual communication, Hocks, "Toward," and Anne Wysocki, "Seriously Visible."
6. See for example, Jay Bolter, Richard Lanham, Christina Hass, 7. See Mary Hocks and Michelle Kendrick for a complete discussion the history of visual and verbal language systems.
8. Personal communication with the author.
653
This content downloaded from 157.253.50.50 on Mon, 01 Oct 2018 16:09:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
CCC 54:4 / JUNE 2003 9. Personal communication with Doug Eyman, co-editor of Kairos. plains it, the approximations of unique visitors, while more bers of visits or hits, are probably underestimated due to technological 10. Personal communication with the author. As Christine Boese increased traffic seems to correspond to moments when the site articles or resources on cult fandoms. She adds that number of that some people might be reading fairly deep the thirty or other pop-up data windows in the site. 11. I did not teach this course, but as director of a faculty development communication across the curriculum I worked with a group of disciplines who integrated multimedia design projects into their Hocks and Daniele Bascelli). Faculty used an intensive summer velop online instructional resources like this site for their courses writing-intensive assignments for their students that capitalized in the multimedia-equipped classroom. 12. I was unable to obtain data on visits to the Spelman College site. 13. Results from an anonymous focus group of students, Spelman GA, May 2, 1992. Works Cited Bass, Randy. "Story and Archive in the Twenty-First Century." College English 61.6 (1999): 659-70. Baym, Nancy. "From Practice to Culture on Usenet." In The Cultures of Computing. Ed. Susan Leigh Star. Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1995. 29-52. Berlin, James A. Rhetorics, Poetics, and Cultures: Refiguring College English Studies. Urbana, IL: NCTE, 1996. Boese, Christine. "The Ballad of the Internet Nutball: Chaining Rhetorical Visons from the Margins to the Mainstream in the Xenaverse" Diss. online 1998 <http:/ /www.nutball.com/dissertation/ index.htm>. Bolter, Jay David. Writing Space: The Computer, Hypertext, and the History of Writing. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, 1991. Bolter, Jay David, and Richard Grusin. Remediation: Understanding New Media. Cambridge: MIT P, 1999. Buchanan, Richard. "Declaration by Design: Rhetoric, Argument, and Demonstration in Design Practice." In Design Discourse: History, Theory, Criticism. Ed. Victor Margolin. Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1989. 91-109. Childers, Pamela B., Eric Hobson, and Joan A. Mullin. ARTiculating: Teaching Writing in a Visual World. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann, 1998. Cope, Bill, and Mary Kalantzis, eds. Multiliteracies: Literacy Learning and the Design of Social Futures. New York: Routledge, 2000. Dondis, Donis A. A Primer of Visual Literacy. Cambridge: MIT P, 1973. 654This content downloaded from 157.253.50.50 on Mon, 01 Oct 2018 16:09:35 UTCAll use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
HOCKS / UNDERSTANDING VISUAL RHETORIC Douglass, Jane Yellowlees. "Will the Most Reflexive Relativist Please Stand Up: Hypertext, Argument, and Relativism." In Page to Screen: Taking Literacy into the Electronic Era. Ed. Ilana J. Snyder. London: Routledge, 1998. 144-62. Ehses, Hanno H. J. "Representing MacBeth: A Case Study in Visual Rhetoric." In Design Discourse: History, Theory, Criticism. Ed. Victor Margolin. Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1989.187-97. Elbow, Peter. "Collage: Your Cheatin' Art." Writing on the Edge 9.1 (Fall/Winter 1997-98): 26-40. Faigley, Lester. Fragments of Rationality: Postmodernity and the Subject of Composition. Pittsburgh, PA: U of Pittsburgh P, 1992. Gibson, Michael. "Teaching Critical Analytical Methods in the Digital Typography Classroom." Visible Language 31.1 (1997): 300-25. Hass, Christina. Writing Technology: Studies on the Materiality ofLiteracy. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Earlbaum, 1996. Heba, Gary. "HyperRhetoric: Multimedia, Literacy, and the Future of Composition." Computers and Composition 14.1 (January 1997): 19-44. Hocks, Mary E. "Toward a Visual Critical Electronic Literacy." Works and Days. 17.1 & 2 (Spring/Fall 1999): 157-72. Hocks, Mary E., and Daniele Bascelli. "Building a Multimedia Program across the Curriculum." In Electronic Communi- cation across the Curriculum. Ed. Richard A. Selfe, Donna Reiss, and Art Young. Urbana, IL: NCTE: 40-56. Hocks, Mary E., and Michelle Kendrick. "Introduction: Eloquent Images." In Eloquent Images: Word and Image in the Age of New Media. Cambridge: MIT UP, 2003. Joyce, Michael. Of Two Minds: Hypertext Pedagogy and Poetics. Ann Arbor: U of Michigan P, 1995. Kaplan, Nancy. "E-Literacies: Politexts, Hypertexts, and Other Cultural Formations in the Late Age of Print." 1997 <http://iat.ubalt.edu/kaplan/lit/>. . "Literacy and Technology: Beyond the Book'" <http://raven.ubalt.edu/staff/ kaplan/parc/>. Knadler, Stephen. "E-Racing Difference in E-Space: Black Female Subjectivity and the Web-Based Portfolio.' Computers and Composition 18.3 (2001): 235-55. Kress, Gunther. "'English' at the Crossroads: Rethinking Curricula of Communication in the Context of the Turn to the Visual." Passions, Pedagogies and 21st Century Technologies. Ed. Gail E. Hawisher and Cynthia L. Selfe. Logan: Utah UP, 1999. 66-88. . "Multimodality." Multiliteracies: Literacy Learning and the Design of Social Futures. Ed. Bill Cope and Mary Kalantzis. New York: Routledge, 2000. 182-202. Landow, George P. Hypertext: The Conver- gence of Contemporary Critical Theory and Technology. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins UP, 1992. Lanham, Richard A. The Electronic Word: Democracy, Technology, and the Arts. Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1993. McDermott, Kristine. "Report on Teaching and Technology Workshop for the Shakespeare Association of America." Unpublished manuscript. Atlanta, GA: Spelman College, 1998.1-5. Mirel, Barbara. "Writing and Database Technology: Extending the Definition of Writing in the Workplace." Electronic Literacies in the Workplace: Technologies of Writing. Ed. Patricia Sullivan and 655This content downloaded from 157.253.50.50 on Mon, 01 Oct 2018 16:09:35 UTCAll use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
CCC 54:4 / JUNE 2003 Jennie Dautermann. Urbana, IL: NCTE, 1996. 91-114. Mirzoeff, Nicholas, ed. The Visual Culture Reader. New York: Routledge, 1998. Mitchell, William J. The Reconfigured Eye: Visual Truth in the Post-Photographic Era. Cambridge: MIT UP 1992. Moulthrop, Stuart. "Beyond the Electronic Book: A Critique of Hypertext Rhetoric." Hypertext '91 Proceedings. New York: The Association for Computing Machinery. 291-98. Mullet, Kevin, and Darrell Sano. Designing Visual Interfaces: Communication Oriented Techniques. Mountain View, CA: Sun Microsystems, 1995. Murray, Janet Horowitz. Hamlet on the Holodeck: The Future of Narrative in Cyberspace. Cambridge: MIT UP, 1998. Porter, James E. Rhetorical Ethics and Internetworked Writing. Greenwich, CT: Ablex, 1998. Porter, James, and Patricia Sullivan. "Remapping Curricular Geography: Professional Writing in/and English Stud- ies" Journal of Business and Technical Communication 7 (1993): 389-422. Schriver, Karen A. Dynamics in Document Design: Creating Textfor Readers. New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1997. Selfe, Cynthia L. "Technology and Literacy: A Story about the Perils of Not Paying Attention." College Composition and Communication 50.3 (February 1999): 411-36. Snyder, Ilana, ed. Page to Screen: Taking Literacy into the Electronic Era. London: Routledge, 1998. Stansberry, Domenic. Labyrinths: The Art of Interactive Writing and Design. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth Publishing, 1998. STORYPACE'. Computer Software. Watertown, MA: Eastgate Systems, Inc. December 2, 2002 <http:// www.eastgate.com/Storyspace.html>. Stroupe, Craig. "Visualizing English: Recognizing the Hybrid Literacy of Visual and Verbal Authorship on the Web." College English 62.5 (May 2000): 607-32. Tufte, Edward. Visual Explanations: Images and Quantities, Evidence and Narrative. Cheshire, CT: Graphics Press, 1997. Wysocki, Anne Frances. "Impossibly Distinct: On Form/Content and Word/ Image in Two Pieces of Computer-Based Interactive Multimedia." Computers and Composition 18 (2001) 209-34. . "Monitoring Order."Kairos 3.2 (Fall 1998). Online <http://english.ttu.edu/ kairos/3.2/indx_f.html>. . "Seriously Visible." Eloquent Images: Word and Image in the Age of New Media. Ed. Mary E. Hocks and Michelle Kendrick. Cambridge: MIT UP, 2003. Mary E. Hocks Mary E. Hocks is assistant professor of English at Georgia State University, where she teaches writing and digital rhetoric courses and also directs the writing across the curriculum program. She has published articles in Computers and Composi- tion, Writing Program Administrator, and Works and Days on hypertext, gender and technology, and multimedia writing and pedagogy. Her coauthored volume Eloquent Images: Word and Image in the Age of New Media appeared in 2003 from MIT University Press. 656This content downloaded from 157.253.50.50 on Mon, 01 Oct 2018 16:09:35 UTCAll use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms