YouTube: A new space for birth?
Author(s): Robyn Longhurst
Source: Feminist Review, No. 93, birth (2009), pp. 46-63
Published by: Palgrave Macmillan Journals
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/40664053
Accessed: 01-10-2018 16:11 UTC
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a widerange of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity andfacilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available athttps://about.jstor.org/terms
Palgrave Macmillan Journals is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend
access to Feminist Review
This content downloaded from 157.253.50.50 on Mon, 01 Oct 2018 16:11:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
93 youTube: a new space for birth? Robyn Longhurst abstract Birth, in many societies, is considered to be a private affair. Although health and medical professionals usually assist, the only other people who share the birth process with mothers are their nearest and dearest. With the rise of information communication technologies, however, birth is no longer an exclusively private event. Some women are now sharing their birthing experiences with millions of viewers who are part of the online video 'community' youTube Broadcast yourself. Searching the word 'birth' on youTube results in close to one million 'hits'. This article is based on a small-scale, qualitative research project, which involved viewing and making notes on several hundred online videos of birth on youTube and the accompanying posts and commentaries about the videos. These data were analysed through a feminist, poststructuralist and geographical lens. Throughout the article the term 'cyber/space' is used to highlight the mutually constituted nature of 'real' and virtual spaces. The article concludes that although youTube has the potential to open up new windows on birth, this potential is not yet being realized. youTube does not overcome or render insignificant material expressions of power, instead it typically privileges US experiences of birth, reiterates discourses of 'good' mothering and censors particular (mainly vaginal) representations of birth. keywords youTube; birth; place; sex; the United States; censorship 46 feminist review 93 2009 (46-63) © 2009 Feminist Review. 0141-7789/09 www.feminist-review.comThis content downloaded from 157.253.50.50 on Mon, 01 Oct 2018 16:11:14 UTCAll use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
introduction Birthing women have long been expected to 'perform' birth in particular ways in particular contexts (Duden, 1993). The regulatory gendered, social cultural practices that surround birth are established through repeated performances of expected behaviours (Butler, 1990). Birth is widely understood to be an intimate, private and profound event. Therefore, when a woman, known only through the news media as Nikki (her screen name), announced '60 minutes' documentary in New Zealand in 2002 that she planned to be filmed giving birth for a pornographic film, it is not surprising that a furore erupted. News reporters, government officials, callers to talk-back radio and others argued that birthing wards were no place for making pornographic films. discourse that birth is an important event in a woman's life when she needs introspective, focused completely on the labour process and on ensuring baby's safe passage into the world - not on making a pornographic film - quickly emerged (Longhurst, 2006). When talking with a social geography class about unfolding of events that surrounded Nikki's plans to be filmed giving birth, one the students commented 'I don't see what the big deal is. You can see anytime on YouTube'. youTube is an online video 'community' that attracts millions of people who to view and share originally created short videos. The student's comments prompted me to think about some of the implications of birthing videos being readily available for public viewing in a variety of countries around world. For the first time, millions of people are now able to see births anytime they want in the privacy of their own homes. youTube was founded in 2005. The youTube fact sheet (2008) states, 7ouTube allows people to easily upload and share video clips on 'www. youTube. com' the Internet through websites, mobile devices, blogs, and e-mail'. Unlike traditional broadcasting that follows time-tabled viewing, people can youTube anytime. Also anyone can broadcast themselves - hence the /ouTube. Information released from youTube in 2007 indicated that people in excess of 100 million videos and upload more than 65,000 videos daily. 7ouTube fact sheet' (2008) states: Our user base is broad in age range, 18-55, evenly divided between males and females, spanning all geographies. Fifty-one percent of our users go to youTube weekly or often, and 52 percent of 18-34 year-olds share videos often with friends and colleagues. youTube is a subsidiary of Google that is free to users because it is used as marketing platform with untargeted advertisements appearing on some of pages. Companies pay to ensure that their name comes up first in searches. youTube is not the only online video-sharing platform, but it is most significant and therefore the focus of this research. This new social practice Robyn Longhurst feminist review 93 2009 47This content downloaded from 157.253.50.50 on Mon, 01 Oct 2018 16:11:14 UTCAll use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
of video sharing has yet to be adequately theorized. Nor is there much empirical work on it as a social phenomenon. The aim of this research, therefore, is to initiate discussion that prompts scholars and others to start thinking more about some of the issues and questions that surround the posting and viewing of videos on youTube, in this case, birthing videos. The article unfolds by first reviewing some of the recent feminist geographical work on bodies and cyber/space. In the second section, I discuss the methodological process used to carry out the research. The process involved gathering and analysing data from several hundred youTube videos and commentaries on birth. In the third section, I argue that although 7ouTube' is supposedly about 'you', this is far more likely if 'you' are from the United States, have access to a computer and are technologically proficient in crafting videos. youTube is also dominated by representations of 'good' birthing mothers. In the fourth section, the arguments about the hegemony of US birthing practices and 'good' mothers are extended by examining the censoring of births on youTube. There are debates about specific birth videos being deemed unsuitable for minors (and requiring viewers to sign in as being over 18) or being removed from youTube altogether because they are considered to contain 'inappropriate1 content. The article concludes that although it might be tempting to read youTube as breaking down some of the fears and misconceptions about birthing because images of birthing are now readily available to millions of people, power relations in cyber/ space reflect and reinforce power relations in 'real' space. Birthing bodies are constituted similarly off-line and online. youTube does not sit outside of normative expectations of what constitutes an 'acceptable' representation of birth, but rather functions to reflect and reinforce these expectations. geographies of bodies and cyber/space Bodies are always located (Nast and Pile, 1998; Longhurst, 2001). They have a fleshy materiality but are also constructed by a range of discourses. Bodies, including birthing bodies, are imbued with power relations. Birthing bodies, contrary to popular belief, are not entirely 'natural', rather they are an interface between nature and culture, biology and the social, materiality and discourse. Margaret Jolly (1998: l) puts it like this: the 'seemingly natural processes' of 'swelling, bearing and suckling, the flows of blood, semen and milk are constituted and fixed not just by the force of cultural conception but by coagulation of power' (p. 2). Spaces too, are not abstract and transparent, but are a 'coagulation of power'. It is impossible to prize apart bodies and spaces. People inhabit different embodied subjectivities (e.g. birthing woman, mother, disabled, elderly, black) in different discursive and material spaces (e.g., pornographic film, youTube videos, 48 feminist review 93 2009 youTubeThis content downloaded from 157.253.50.50 on Mon, 01 Oct 2018 16:11:14 UTCAll use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
1 For exceptions, see Longhurst (2000, 2005, 2008); Mahon- Daly and Andrews (2002); Madge, Noxolo and Raghuram (2004); Madge and O'Connor (2005); Boswell- Penc and Boyer (2007). 2 See Grosz (1994: 79) on the ways in which zones surrounding bodies change. homes and hospitals, restaurants). Sometimes these subjectivities and spaces occupied are seemingly contradictory (such as a birthing woman being the subject in a pornographic film). In this way, bodies both produce space are produced by space. In other words, YouTube is not simply a neutral backdrop for birthing bodies rather it constitutes them, and is in turn, constituted by them. Although over the past few years social scientists and others have begun to more attention to bodies, in my own discipline of human geography maternal bodies, that is, bodies that conceive, give birth and nurture other bodies, largely been ignored. Yet, examining maternal bodies through a spatial offers opportunities to think about them as inseparable from the spaces and places of their (re)production (Longhurst, 2008: 3). Scott Sharpe (1999: notes that childbirth in the West is an 'intensely political issue1 and an intensely geographical issue. Maria Fannin (2003: 515) explains 'Representations of birth are (always) spatial, yet, until recently, popular and academic work on birth tended to elide the significance of the changing spatiality of birth'. Birth is a social and spatial process that is bound up with not only material but discursive spaces. Geographers are well positioned to take on the task of thinking about birth as both a social and spatial process. There is an undeniable spatiality to the birthing body. For example, during birth, women experience their bodily boundaries as volatile.2 For birthing women, zones between bodies and spaces are indeterminate both outside and inside bodies. Birthing bodies destabilize binaries between mother and infant; one two; inside and outside; and self and other. But, it is not only the birthing itself as a space that is worthy of consideration, the space that it 'takes up' constituted within is also significant. I am thinking here about the physicality space - how we connect with surrounding spatial fields through our comportment, 'look' and so on - as well as the discursive space. Claire Madge and Henrietta O'Connor (Madge and O'Connor, 2002 and 2006) internet space 'cyber/space'. They explain: 'The use of the backslash in cyber/ space is intended to be emblematic of the mutually constituted, dyadic nature of both spaces, where clear distinctions between the two spaces can become blurred' (2005: 83). In an empirical study, which used Web-based questionnaire surveys and semi-structured virtual group interviews with mothers who used online discussion and community forums within Babyworld, Madge and O'Connor argue that cyber/space and geographical or 'real' space coexist for new mothers. They explain that 'although cyberspace can result in the production of new selves, these selves have residual attachments to embodied experiences and practices' (2005: 83). 'Cybermothers', it seems, live online and onsite lives simultaneously (also see Madge and O'Connor, 2002 and 2006). I drew on Madge and O'Connor's conceptualization of cyber/space to develop theoretical context for this research project on the production and consumption Robyn Longhurst feminist review 93 200 9 49This content downloaded from 157.253.50.50 on Mon, 01 Oct 2018 16:11:14 UTCAll use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
of birth on youTube. I am interested not only in different forms of social organization but also in the subjectivities and actions of individuals. Birthing bodies are sites of identity, morality, aestheticism, practical action, pleasure and pain. They have a materiality - skeleton, flesh, foetus, amniotic fluid, cervix and blood - but this materiality is always constituted within discourses or systems of gendered, social and cultural signification, such as youTube. Bodies do not float freely detached from any context; they are always constituted within particular spaces and places. observing birth Visual culture, whether advertisements, family photographs, surveillance tapes, cartoons in newspapers, fashion spreads in glossy magazines, paintings or youTube videos, is central to the cultural construction of social life (in the context of the maternal see Betterton, 2002 and Tyler, 2001 and 2008). It is important, therefore, to think carefully about how visual ¡mages might be analysed. In working towards a 'critical visual methodology', Rose (2001) makes three suggestions. The first is that it is important to 'take images seriously1 (p. 15). By this, she means that images should not simply be reduced to their context because they have their own effects. Rose's comments prompted me to think that youTube birth videos deserve to be taken seriously, noting their context but also their effects on producers, participants and observers. The second point that Rose makes is that it is important to think about 'the social conditions and effect of visual objects' (p. 15). She explains that 'visual representations both depend on and produce social inclusions and exclusions' (p. 16). In this analysis of youTube videos of birth, I attempted to think about who is being included and who is being excluded from this cultural practice of producing and consuming birth videos. The third point that Rose makes in working towards a 'critical visual methodology' is that it is important to consider one's own way of looking at images. Throughout this research, I have remained aware of my own positionality as someone who has given birth to two children but who did not want others, outside of immediate family, to witness these events. To conduct this research, I used the search function on youTube typing in keywords, such as 'birth' resulting in 864,000 hits, 'childbirth' resulting in 15,100 hits, 'multiple births' resulting in a much more modest 2,110 hits and 'stillborn births' in an even more modest 695 hits. I spent many hours, over a period of several months, viewing hundreds of youTube videos, checking their star ratings (viewers rate the videos) and reading commentaries (viewers comment on the videos). I typically looked at and made notes on approximately 10 videos each day. There are also options on youTube to post videos to other online spaces, such as MySpace or Facebook, Blogs or other Websites. Users can chose to broadcast their videos either publicly or privately sharing them only with friends 50 feminist review 93 2009 youTubeThis content downloaded from 157.253.50.50 on Mon, 01 Oct 2018 16:11:14 UTCAll use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
and family upon upload. Each video also offers viewers 'Statistics and Data' where you can see how many people have viewed the video, its rating and the number of comments posted. There is also a list of 'Honors for this video' and a list of 'Sites linking to this video'. Needless to say, it was not possible to look at every video, or even sample every fifth video that appeared on a list. This 'survey' makes no pretence towards sampling based in the quantitative tradition. Many of the YouTube videos I watched offered no way of discerning exactly what might be in them (except for a small thumbnail that often appears on the side of the screen). Rather, I tended to visit sites in a random fashion clicking on those I thought looked 'interesting' for a variety of reasons such as that they offered a more 'unusual' kind of birth (multiple babies, water birth, or that a video had been posted by someone in a country other than the United States or the United Kingdom). Also, I focused more on visual images of birthing rather than on stories about birthing (e.g., news stories), because I began this project by thinking about the politics of visual representations of birth (i.e., birthing being included in a pornographic film). However, I also noted in a diary things such as narration, text, music used in the video and my emotional response to them. The visual can not be separated out from the other senses. I also considered who was present in the video, such as a partner, friends, children, midwife and/or a surgeon, and which camera angles were used, such as close-ups, wide-angle shots and panning. Given that I am interested in cyber/space and how this might be producing a particular kind of spatiality, I also paid keen attention to the spaces depicted in the videos. I noted where the pregnant and birthing woman, mother, baby and others were physically located in various shots. The spaces of homes (especially lounges and bedrooms), hospital birthing wards and operating theatres figured prominently in the videos. Focusing on this array of factors helped me to build a more robust picture of what Rose (2001: 30) refers to as the 'technological modality', 'compositional modality' and 'social modality' of the ¡mages. The diary entries were analysed using a discourse approach (see Rose, 2001 on visual methodologies). The relationship between 'visual images, verbal texts, institutions and social practices' (Rose, 2001: 140) was of central concern. I read through the diary entries several times noting both similarities and differences in terms of content, ¡mages, narrations and themes. I was mindful that there is no stable foundation, or essence, to being a birthing woman. There is no preconstituted 'body' on to which birthing is inscribed; what it means to give birth is constantly being produced and reproduced through varying and competing discourses, and practices that occur in both cyber/space and 'real' space. This does not mean, however, that there are not some videos of birth that are more typical than others. Robyn Longhurst fem ¡ n ist review 93 2009 51This content downloaded from 157.253.50.50 on Mon, 01 Oct 2018 16:11:14 UTCAll use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
At this point, it may be helpful to provide an example of a YouTube birth video that is fairly typical of many that can be found online. In 'X's Birth', viewers are 3 i have refrained not offered voiceovers, but music (reasonably upbeat) and a series of specifichamo, storyboards. The video begins with a shot of a pregnant white woman's bare dates or URL links> because I am stomach tied with a baby-blue coloured sheer ribbon. The first storyboard reads, 'The waiting b and arrival of X' which is followed quickly *i / by / a second story / board - children b *i / / / reading about their 'After one week of prodromal labour be the daughter) and the mother to be their lounge. 5 The next storyboard 5 J y J J questions that at 3.00pm 7 cm dilated'. In the next supported by a man (presumed to be appear to be nuclear families) as she feel as they grow mother lying on a hospital bed sipping people are by her side to assist (for storyboard J reads, ' 'Only J a few pushes', J ' J r ' ' constructed of protruding fully from baby half out (from sealed in r plastic gloves, r 6 > 6 5 / v passage 6 inches). They tend to continues to play. The baby is covered in blood. The fifth storyboard reads, * X born', which is followed by the baby being handed to his mother. Viewers do not see the cord being cut, but do see a close-up of the new baby latched onto the mother's nipple. He now has on a cream-colored hat, but the rest of the shot - baby and breast - is all skin. Following this are several more shots including the new baby lying on scales, the sibling sipping a drink in the midst of the activities, the mother being given some water to sip and a storyboard that reads, 'Our beautiful whole baby boy'. This is followed by a shot of him lying on his back, naked and 'clean' (all traces of blood removed). In the final frame, the baby has been turned on to his stomach, head to the side, eyes closed sleeping and has the blue ribbon tied around him - the same ribbon that viewers saw in the opening shot tied around his mother's pregnant stomach. There is undoubtedly a sense of being a voyeur when watching videos such as this. 'X's birth' was not as amateurish in style as many (it had been created using OneTrue Media), and the camera work was steady. The lack of voices gave it a rather more 'professional' feel than some, but still I experienced a strong sense of being drawn into a stranger's intimate familial relations and spaces. It did not feel like watching a professionally made film or television programme. I found myself wondering how I might feel if I ever happened to meet the child being born and whether I would I admit to watching the youTube video. The video of X being born is typical, in that it depicts an Anglo US woman who appears to be in her early thirties. Also, the spaces depicted in the video are typical. The first scene, as the mother begins her labour, is a lounge room in a home. The second scene is a birthing ward in a hospital. The mother births lying propped up on her back. 52 feminist review 93 2009 youTubeThis content downloaded from 157.253.50.50 on Mon, 01 Oct 2018 16:11:14 UTCAll use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
5 On 'good' mothers in relation to professional women, especially women in management, see Gatrell (2004), and accountancy, see Haynes (2008). On lbad' mothers and the politics of blame, see Ladd- Taylor and Umansky (1998). Amid flashes of blue surgical gowns, gloved hands are shown guiding the baby's passage into the world. "good* mothers Nearly all of the YouTube videos that I analysed represented the birthing subjects as 'good' mothers (and those around them as 'good' supporters). This was so obvious - normative - that it was almost possible to overlook it. This is well- trodden ground for feminist academics. As Susan Chase and Mary Rogers (2001: 30) explain, 'We all know the ideal of the good mother. Above all, she is selfless. Her children come before herself and any other need or person or commitment, no matter what'. Constructing and representing the self as a 'good' mother does not just start after birth. It is interesting to note, however, that birthing videos are not exempt from this discourse of 'good' mothers. In youTube birth videos, words, images, icons and music are used frequently to craft a space befitting of a 'good' mother - a space of beauty, love, miracles, kindness, adoring partners, sentimental music, self-reflexivity and new beginnings - whether that be at home, in a hospital or in a surgical ward. For example, a video on the birth of twins and triplets begins with the words on the screen 'This video is dedicated with love and admiration to all the moms of multiples who gave their all no matter what the outcome'. 'Good' mothers give their all. In 'Birth of y, the father films the labour (heterosexual ity and nuclear families appear normative in most youTube birth videos), his partner being wheeled on a bed to the operation theatre and the baby being handed to his partner after she returns from 24 hours in intensive care. The storyboards include 'Mommy of y ... the lady I love', 'THE HAPPIEST MOMENT ... first touch of mommy with son y, 7's grandmother handing him over to his mommy' and 'Finally one happy family completed'. Rose (2004: 560) suggests in her research on family photographs (perhaps not dissimilar to birth videos) that the 'groupings of those photographed, the photographs themselves and those looking at photographs are all structured by a discourse of "togetherness" that is central to Western familiar ideology'. But, Rose goes further to suggest that family photos are also about mothering. She explains, it is impossible for mothers to be filled with love all the time, they can also feel hateful towards children even if this hate is not acted out. The photograph, unlike actual children, can be picked up, examined, and put back in its place. youTube videos are similar. At the click of a button, babies and children can be made to appear and disappear. Images of babies and children can be accompanied by narratives and/or music that engender certain moods or feelings, such as joy rather than pain, for parents and others watching and listening. The video 'Z is born' unfolds to the song 'Butterfly kisses'. The lyrics begin, 'There's two things I know for sure. She was sent here from heaven, and she's daddy's little girl. As I drop to my knees by her bed at night, she talks to Jesus, and I close my Robyn Longhurst fem i n i st review 93 2009 53This content downloaded from 157.253.50.50 on Mon, 01 Oct 2018 16:11:14 UTCAll use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
eyes. And I thank God for all of the joy in my life, oh but most of all, for Butterfly kisses after bedtime prayer'. Towards the end of this video, the soundtrack from this song is overlaid with comments from the people present at the birth. When the mother is handed her new girl, someone (one of the hospital team) exclaims, 'Oh she is beautiful'. The mother kisses her new baby's head and sheds a few emotional tears. The song 'Butterfly kisses' continues to play throughout the video. Birthing carries a moral weight and it is important, therefore, to be seen both in 'real' space and cyber/space as doing it 'right', that is, doing it with love, tenderness and care. Some are likely to argue, however, that doing it right would mean doing it privately, not putting the birth of one's child on youTube. Given that for many years, birth in the West has been constructed as a private matter that takes place in private spaces, whether that is in a home, birthing centre or hospital ward, it is not surprising that the availability of births on youTube raises concerns for some. A number of mainly white middle class mothers with whom I spoke informally during the course of this research said that they would never put a video of themselves giving birth online, because they think that there is a sanctity to birth that ought to be upheld. Also during the course of this research, a television channel in New Zealand (TV3) presented the findings of this project on their morning programme, 'Sunrise'. I was told by the reporter that even before the story went to air, it created a lot of discussion in the newsroom. Footage of a woman screwing up her face, and then partially covering her eyes, as she peeked across at the news reporter's computer screen, which showed a woman giving birth, was included in the final news item that went to air. The news item also included footage of the reporter asking a heavily pregnant woman on the street what she thought of putting birth videos on youTube. She replied, 'That's disgusting. 'Cause, I don't know, it's a beautiful thing you know, in your life, but that's like gross'. A second interviewee responded similarly, 'That's revolting. It's quite tacky' (Birth online: the last taboo, 2009). 'Respectability' is a key device long used to pass judgments on mothers (Gillies, 2007). Mothers who post their birth videos on youTube might have some financial and cultural resources to draw upon (e.g., they have access to computer, video equipment, editing software packages and the skills to use these), but this does not necessarily stop other mothers from judging their actions and labelling them as vulgar (see Skeggs, 1997). Online birthing women are produced through reactions of disgust that embody long-standing disquiet about reproductive bodies (Tyler, 2008). birth: a US-centric view It seems that currently women in New Zealand are not keen to participate in this trend of posting videos of birth on youTube. Many of the participants are from the United States. On youTube, it is possible to set a 'country-content 54 feminist review 93 2 00 9 youTubeThis content downloaded from 157.253.50.50 on Mon, 01 Oct 2018 16:11:14 UTCAll use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
preference'. I set mine to 'international', although periodically I also set it to a range of other countries, such as New Zealand, to see what emerged. There is usually no way (unless specified) of knowing exactly where a video has been made and who has posted it, but many of the people (mainly women) narrating the videos speak in English with a US accent of some description. Patricia Lange (2007: 32) reports that researchers at Delft University of Technology in the Netherlands showed that 70 per cent of users with channel pages claimed to be from the United States (see Gomes, 2006). Lange (2007: 32) notes that although self-reported data such as these must be treated with some caution, such a high percentage does tend to indicate 'a US-centric core of participation despite the availability of global video sharing'. youTube aims to enable 'anyone to find, upload, watch and share original video worldwide ... [and to] make it universally accessible and useful' (youTube fact sheet, 2008). They state, 7ouTube continues to operate independently, completely within the US. However, we are committed to "internationalizing" youTube by translating services and features into each country's native language' (youTube fact sheet, 2008). What this means in relation to birthing is that, on the one hand, youTube can be considered a participatory cyber movement of sorts because it enables the sharing of videos across the globe and facilitates online social networking, but on the other hand, it is far more likely that videos will be both posted and watched (produced and consumed) by people who live in the United States. Therefore, youTube participants need to understand that these representations of birthing practices in cyber/space are not global, but reflect trends typical of lreal' spaces within the United States. There seems to be some awareness of this illustrated by some youTube video makers who indicate in the title of their video that they do not come from the United States or other Anglo centres. For example, in a video that signals through its title that the birth is taking place in 'Asia', the majority of the 17 comments posted focus on cultural 'difference'. Bimstah says, 'In the vid, 0:49, the mother (I assume) says, "Lagyan mo ng dimples" [Put a dimple] and you see the midwife "putting dimples" on the baby's cheeks while saying, "Nilalagyan ko" [yes Pm making dimples!]. "I mean, WTF [What The Fuck]". Petra asks, 'why all alone and not even a blanket to give it some warmth? Strange, i don't understand this'. Kimcheetaejin replies, 'maybe the place is warm enough'. Avyeel23 adds, 'it's verrrrry warm and humid in that part of the world'. (Babe is probably crying in happiness to get out,) Meghatoobusy says, 'it is like that in Asia it seems they will clean the baby and then give the baby to his/her mother ... '. In this narrative, 'Asia' (the birth appears to be taking place more specifically in the Philippines, at least this is the language being spoken) is constructed as a homogenous other to the United States - as 'the place', 'that part of the world' and 'strange'. Birthing bodies are not universal, but are mediated through webs of power and representations. I am not suggesting here that the materiality of all Robyn Longhurst feminist review 93 2009 55This content downloaded from 157.253.50.50 on Mon, 01 Oct 2018 16:11:14 UTCAll use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
birthing bodies remains the same, while perceptions simply change. Different cultural understandings literally make different birthing bodies not only in 'real' space but also in cyber/space. Cultural differences exist between women in different regions and countries and also between women in the same region and country. Like Asia, the United States itself is undoubtedly a large and complex territory constituted by an array of ethnic, cultural, political, class, economic, social and sexual difference. Nevertheless broad patterns regarding what is seen as 'appropriate1 in relation to contemporary birthing - including where to birth (hospital, birthing centre and home), technologies surrounding birth ('natural', induced and Caesarean), who is present at births (partner, friends, children and surgeon) and birthing rituals (who cuts the cord, music being played and positions for the birthing woman) - are established as norms that are constituted within 'real' space and also within cyber/space. Many of of the births on youTube videos will look familiar to a US, and to some extent Canadian, European and Australasian audience, but not necessarily to those from or living in other parts of the world, such as Asia, the Pacific Islands and Africa, where women adopt a range of 'other(ed)' diverse birthing practices (see Ram and Jolly, 1998). A particular kind of birth space, a 'modern' space, an Anglo space, an American space is being (re)produced online. Western birth practices are normalized both within 'real' space and cyber/space. Although it is possible to seek out 'other' experiences of birth, most viewers, Western and non-Western alike, will for the most part, see a reasonably narrow range of birthing experiences represented on youTube. birthing place, contested space yet another theme that illustrates that the power relations surrounding birth are as significant in cyber/space as they are in 'real' space is censorship. When searching for 'childbirth', some of the video titles that appear on the screen are marked with the warning: 'This video or group may contain content that is inappropriate for some users, as flagged by youTube's user community. To view this video or group, please verify you are 18 or older by logging in or signing up'. After passing the warning pages, a header appears: 'This video may not be suitable for minors'. Not all the youTube videos on childbirth are available to minors. This can be read as ironic given that all human beings are born. We can do it (be born), but not necessarily see it or learn about it. Women under the age of 18 also give birth. Registering to access R18 videos left me feeling like I was doing something potentially immoral. I wondered if I viewed the R18 video on my computer at work, I would get 'in trouble'. I wondered if I did it on my computer at home, if my teenage sons would think that I had been viewing pornography. Interestingly, however, it appears to be just human births that are censored. youTube offers births not just of children but also of animals, such as, and 56 feminist review 93 2 00 9 youTubeThis content downloaded from 157.253.50.50 on Mon, 01 Oct 2018 16:11:14 UTCAll use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
especially, cats and dogs, elephants, monkeys, pandas, snakes, sheep, tigers, kangaroos, dolphins, seals, whales and sharks. Searching for animal births does not appear to result in any censorship. This raises the question, 'what is it that makes animal births acceptable but human births potentially inappropriate for the eyes of the under 18s?1 Perhaps it is the semi or sometimes full nudity. Perhaps it is the sight of a woman's vagina sometimes clearly seen in videos, other times implied by shots of a baby coming from 'that' general area. Searches indicate that 'natural1 births are far more likely than Caesarean births to be censored. In fact, I did not come across any censoring of Caesarean births. Some of the videos of Caesarean births are very graphic in their depictions of incisions, membranes, blood, tissue and surgical instruments. Seemingly headless bodies with bloodied gloved hands extract babies from the fleshy cavities of pregnant women. These close-up views of major surgery do not appear to be censored in any way. Both the aforementioned videos attracted a lot of comment. Cherrychick22 writes, 'good God in heaven almighty ... and I thought normal delivery was bad!1 Wikedjester46 says, 'i have my c-section next week, and now I'm officailly [sic] scared to death!!!!'. Jinglespbell says, 'things like this make me glad I'm a man. women are strong beings to endure things like this, ouch!' MsLovett08 exclaims, 'OMG [Oh My God]! I had to have an emergency Caesarean with my first baby ... and they put me to sleep ... so this is what happened huh ... I'm so disgusted!' HypoAllengicJin replies, 'I second that. This vid actually made me nauseous. And that's V£RV difficult to do with me'. It seems then that objections to specific videos are not based simply on its potential to prompt abjection, but perhaps more on its potential to blur the boundaries between sexual gratification and birth. Vaginas are an 'eroticized orifice' (Grosz, 1990: 88) through which babies pass. In recent years, in the West, we have seen something of a discursive shift in the representation of pregnant women. Some pregnant women, including many celebrities (see Tyler, 2001), have refuted the idea that the pregnant body must be hidden under folds of fabric and have instead adopted a fashionable and sometimes revealing style of dressing as a way of resisting constructions of the pregnant subject as modest, respectable, domestic, asexual and private. The birthing subject on YouTube can in some ways also be seen to be resisting these constructions of the maternal subject although the comments above also reiterate discourses of mothering as selfless, loving and sentimental. The birthing body is also constructed as sexual for some. At this point, it is useful to return to the story, which opened this article - the story of Nikki who in 2002 wanted to be filmed giving birth (in a hospital), so the footage could be included in a pornographic film. This prompted a public outcry, but the decision was defended by both Nikki and film maker Steve Crow. Constructions of birthing women can provoke feelings of both desire and disgust depending on the ways in Robyn Longhurst feminist review 93 2009 57This content downloaded from 157.253.50.50 on Mon, 01 Oct 2018 16:11:14 UTCAll use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
which various bodies perform in various spatial contexts including, so it would seem, cyber/space. Just as pregnant women who present themselves as proud and 'sexy', as they move through various public spaces, may evoke a range of different responses, such as practiced indifference, a fleeting glance, a stare of fascination, desire, shock, or abhorrence, so too can the birthing body. Although as yet there is not a thriving industry in pornography that features birthing women, there is an industry that features pregnant women. Tristan Taormino (2002: l), a columnist for New York's Village Voice, reports, 'A quick survey of current print, video, and online pornography proves that pregnant chicks are actually a pretty popular fetish'. Questions about the conceptualization of pregnant, birthing and babies1 bodies are at stake in the making and screening of pornographic films about pregnancy and birth. Associating pregnancy, and especially birth, with sexual gratification challenges mainstream notions of what constitutes a 'good1 mother. There is a dominant discourse that pregnant and birthing women must not unnecessarily 'flaunt* body parts that are eroticized even though (or maybe, because) the pregnant and birthing body is a body that is assumed to have had sex. The boundary between what is considered 'normal' and what is considered 'disgusting' or 'sick' is constantly struggled over. It is not surprising, therefore, to find online debates about the censoring of some youTube birth videos (see Gunter, 2002 on media sex and Smith, 2000 on moral geographies). Some representations of birth on YouTube are embraced by some, tolerated by others and deemed 'inappropriate' or even 'disgusting' by still others. Staff members at YouTube respond to the collective will of the YouTube 'community' by removing some videos in an attempt to restore 'respectability'. youTube staff explains, Our community understands the rules and effectively polices the site for inappropriate material. The users can flag content that they feel is inappropriate and once it is flagged, youTube reviews the content and removes it from the system within minutes if it violates our Terms of Use (youTube fact sheet, 2008) In 2007, Laura Shanley sent a letter to staff at youTube (Letters from Laura, 2008). Shanley's letter is titled 'Censorship on youTube'. She writes, Many wonderful childbirth videos have been deleted by youTube supposedly because they violate your obscenity policies. Homebirth and natural childbirth videos are specifically being targeted, yet many are far less graphic than hospital birth videos which show close up images of vaginas being cut by doctors (episiotomies) and other interventions. Perhaps when birth is presented as a medical event it is viewed as acceptable but when it is presented as a natural, loving act between a woman, her baby and her partner it is viewed as sexual and therefore obscene. Shanley makes an interesting point. She received a message from the youTube team in response to her letter explaining that her video 'An unassisted childbirth', 58 feminist review 93 2009 youTubeThis content downloaded from 157.253.50.50 on Mon, 01 Oct 2018 16:11:14 UTCAll use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
after being 'flagged' by members of the youTube 'community' and reviewed by youTube staff, had been removed due to its inappropriate nature. It is tempting to think that perhaps Shanley's story speaks to an isolated incident but Kelly Zantey, the Creator of 'BellyBelly.com.au' (2008), an Australian Website on birth-related topics, tells a similar story: I am soooooo tired of beautiful birth presentations being removed off of youTube for a violation of service! It happens all the time ... It's ridiculous, women don't witness birth much these days and aren't involved in it until their own most of the time, and even on the internet (where you can see much worse than a baby being born!) it's not allowed either! What's with the keeping birth from women?! (BellyBelly.com.au, 2008). The response of the youTube support team to letters such as this appears to be denial that they are taking down videos of 'natural1 births and a request for the URLs to the videos in question so that they can look further into the matter in question. Nevertheless 'social tagging' (viewers 'tagging' what they consider to be potentially inappropriate videos for minors or offensive) results in the creation of a contested space of representation. The politics that surround birth in 'real' space are reflected and reinforced in cyber/space. The potential of youTube to offer an emancipatory space that can pluralize understandings of birth seems rather limited at this point. youTube videos of birth provide a way for women to share information, but this does not mean that they are devoid of the same or similar politics that surround birth in 'real' space. conclusion Never has it been as easy to see a birth as it is now (for some at least). acknowledged that not everyone wants to see a birth, but for those who have access to a computer and the internet), it is now possible at the press few computer keys to see hundreds, even thousands, of births close personal. Vulvas, vaginas, fluids, dilated cervix, babies heads crowning, cords, placentas - these words associated with birthing were not long ago (and still are in some contexts), but now we can view videos of 'real' women 'real' babies in the process of birth. After conducting this research, I find at least in part, wanting to share the optimism of home birth advocate 'achildbirth.com' in an introduction to 'Video of human birth' (2008) who that as people have the opportunity to watch more births the norm of childbirth will 'gradually change'. However, I say 'share in part', because I feel optimism needs to be tempered with some words of caution. Hester Parr (2002: 78) explains, 'virtual geographies are still relatively exclusive, with only some individuals having the ability to access these spaces'. important when thinking about births on youTube to be mindful that many in the world manage to conceive, carry their babies in utero and give Robyn Longhurst fern i n ist review 93 2009 59This content downloaded from 157.253.50.50 on Mon, 01 Oct 2018 16:11:14 UTCAll use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
without ever turning on a computer. But, even among those who do use youTube, we can not necessarily assume that there is uniformity. Jenkins et al. (cited in Lange, 2007: 32) note that there is a 'participation gap' between advanced and novice users. Jenkins et al forecast that this gap will increase because 'learning to manipulate video equipment and computer-based editing software is expensive and non-trivial'. This returns us to the initial point raised about the predominance of US users. The youTube Fact Sheet says that they are 'committed to "internationalizing" youTube by translating services and features into each country's native language1, but this is only one obstacle to the creation of a shared global space around birthing. The other obstacles, to name just a few, are access to a computer, video equipment, editing software packages and the skills to use these. These limitations of access feed into producing rather limited and culturally bound norms of what constitutes desirable and acceptable representations of birth. Birth has never been more visible within popular culture and media and yet watching hundreds of videos and reading commentaries about these videos and women's experiences of posting and watching them reveals that while in some ways this trend is revolutionary, there is also occurring a kind of 're-silencing' of some women's maternal experience. Delia Pollock (1999: l) writes, 'Birth stories are everywhere and nowhere. Seen in every movie theatre but heard only in the brief gasps of attention in grocery store lines or parking lots, inculcated in prenatal classrooms but shamed to the edges of conversation, birth stories permeate and haunt our everyday lives'. Perhaps unsurprisingly, this same scenario is being reiterated in cyber/space. On the one hand, birth stories and videos appear to be everywhere. The result of searching a phrase, such as 'childbirth' on youTube results in more 'hits' than one could view in several months. And yet as Pollock suggests, 'All too much here and barely there' - there is something more complex going on. Examining hundreds of the youTube videos and the commentaries that surround them reveal that many of the youTube videos reiterate the discourse of what a 'good' mother should be. Also, the videos are US based and provide a view of birth that reiterates hegemonic discourses of Western reproductive health, care and medicine. After spending months watching hundreds of youTube videos of birth I find myself not wanting to either celebrate or condemn cyber/space as a site for birth. On the one hand, it is possible to argue that to some degree at least youTube provides for some qualitatively new configurations of social and spatial powers. Women can see many births, seeking out the ones they desire (including some that contest the norm). Potentially then youTube offers a space that can bring together women and men from different spaces, rural spaces, towns, cities, regions, nations and continents, to share information about birth. On the other hand, as Adams and Ghose (2003: 416) note, 'New technologies play a clear role in accentuating social divides and favoring pre-existing authority structures'. What becomes obvious when viewing hundreds of youTube videos and 60 feminist review 93 2009 youTubeThis content downloaded from 157.253.50.50 on Mon, 01 Oct 2018 16:11:14 UTCAll use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
commentaries is that this cyber/space is dominated by Western, and more specifically North American women. It is not surprising that these women's representations of birth have the highest profile in YouTube because it is these women who tend to have the most access to computer, video equipment, editing software packages and the skills to use these. youTube does not overcome or render insignificant material expressions of social, economic and political power, rather online and off-line spaces are mutually constituted. To return to Madge and O'Connor's (2005) explanation of the term cyber/space, use of the backslash is emblematic of the mutually constituted nature of both virtual and lreaT space. Clear distinctions between these two are blurred. This is evident in examining (re)presentations of births on youTube. Currently, youTube does not pluralize understandings of birth. This does not mean that viewers will simply succumb to birthing as it is represented online but rather they will variously reject, embrace or selectively accommodate these images. The way people construct and view videos of birth is mediated through gender differences and also through differences in sexuality, class, ethnicity, age, and culture, a subject area that could usefully be teased out in future feminist research on this topic. The aim of this research was to initiate discussion that prompts scholars and others to start thinking more about some of the issues and questions that surround the posting and viewing of videos on youTube, in this case birthing videos. I look forward to the discussions that might follow. acknowledgements I am grateful to Imogen Tyler, Caroline Gatrell and the anonymous referees for their constructive and insightful feedback. I would also like to acknowledge the thoughtful comments offered by members of the audience in the Department of Geography, University of Waikato on 11 May 2009, and the International Geographical Union Commission on Gender and Geography Conference in Szeged, Hungary on 22 May 2009. author biography Robyn Longhurst is Professor of Geography, University of Waikato and an editor of Gender, Place and Culture: A Journal of Feminist Geography. She teaches feminist, social, and cultural geography. Robyn has published on issues relating to pregnancy, mothering, lfat' bodies, food Visceral geographies1, masculinities, and the politics of knowledge. She is author of Bodies: Exploring Fluid Boundaries (2001), Maternities: Gender, Bodies and Spaces (2008) and co-author of Pleasure Zones: Bodies, Cities, Spaces (2001) and Space, Place, and Sex: Geographies of Sexualities (forthcoming). Robyn Longhurst fern i n ist review 93 2009 61This content downloaded from 157.253.50.50 on Mon, 01 Oct 2018 16:11:14 UTCAll use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
references Adams, P.C. and Ghose, R. (2003) 'India. com: The Construction of a Space Between1 Progress in Human Geography, Vol. 27, No. 4: 414-437. BellyBelly.com.au (2008) http://www.joyousbirth.info/forums/showthread.php?t=8651¿highlight= pulled+utube+videos, (accessed 5 November 2008). Betterton, R. (2002) 'Prima Gravida: reconfiguring the maternal body in visual representation' Feminist Theory, Vol. 3, No. 2: 255-270. 3 News Sunrise (2009) Interview by AM Ik ram, Birth online: the last taboo. http://www.3news .co.nz/Birth-online-The-last-taboo/tabid/372/articlelD/94631/cat/214/Default.aspx4*video, (accessed 20 March 2009). Boswell-Penc, M. and Boyer, K. (2007) 'Expressing anxiety? Breast pump usage in American wage workplaces' Gender, Place and Culture: A Journal of Feminist Geography, Vol. 14, No. 5: 551-567. Butler, J. (1990) Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of Identity, New York: Routledge. Chase, S.E. and Rogers, M.F. (2001) Mothers and Children: Feminist Analyses and Personal Narratives, New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press. Duden, B. (1993) (translated by Lee Hoinacki) Disembodying Women: Perspectives on Pregnancy and the Unborn, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press. Fannin, M. (2003) 'Domesticating birth in the hospital: 'family centered' birth and the emergence of 'homelike' birthing rooms' Antipode, Vol. 34, No. 3: 513-535. Gatrell, C. (2004) Hard Labour: The Sociology of Parenthood, Maidenhead: Open University Press. Gillies, V. (2007) Marginalised Mothers: Exploring Working-Class Experiences of Parenting, London: Routledge. Gomes, L. (2006) 'Will all of us get our 15 minutes on a YouTube video?' The Wall Street Journal, 30 August 2006. http://online.wsj.com/public/article/SB115689298168048904- 5wWyrsSwyn6RfVfz9NwLk774VUWc_20070829.htmo?mod=rss_free, (accessed 16 July 2007). Grosz, £. (1990) 'The body of signification' in Fletcher, J. and Benjamin, A. editors Abjection, Melancholia and Love: The Work of Julia Kristeva, London: Routledge, 80-103. Grosz, E. (1994) Volatile Bodies: Toward a Corporeal Feminism, St Leonards: Allen and Unwin. Gunter, B. (2002) Media Sex: What are the Issues?, London: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. Haynes, K. (2008) '(Re)figuring accounting and maternal bodies: the gendered embodiment of accounting professionals' Accounting, Organizations and Society, Vol. 33, No. 4-5: 328-348. Jenkins, H., Purushotma, R., Clinton, K. and Alice, J. (no date) 'Confronting the Challenges of Participatory Culture: Media Education for the 21st Century' http://www.projectnml.org/files/ NMLWhitePaper.pdf, (accessed 16 July 2007). Jolly, M. (1998) 'Colonial and post-colonial plots in histories of maternities and modernities' in Ram, K. and Jolly, M. editors Maternities and Modernities: Colonial and Post-Colonial Experiences in Asia and the Pacific, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1-25. Ladd-Taylor, M. and Umansky, L. (1998) 'Bad' Mothers: The Politics of Blame in Twentieth- Century America, New York: New York University Press. Lange, P. (2007) 'Searching for the 'You' in 'YouTube': an analysis of online response ability', http:// www.elearning-reviews.org/topics/culture/2007-large-youtube-analysis-online-response-ability (accessed 28 July, 2009) EPIC - Ethnographic Praxis in Industry Conference 31-45. Letters from Laura (2008) http://laurashanley.blogspot.com/2007/08/censorship-on-youtube.html, (accessed 5 November 2008). Longhurst, R. (2000) "Corporeographies' of pregnancy: 'bikini babes" Environment and Planning D: Society and Space, Vol. 18, No. 4: 453-472. Longhurst, R. (2001) Bodies: Exploring Fluid Boundaries, London: Routledge. 62 feminist review 93 2009 youTubeThis content downloaded from 157.253.50.50 on Mon, 01 Oct 2018 16:11:14 UTCAll use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
Longhurst, R. (2005) ( (Ad) dress ing pregnant bodies in New Zealand: clothing, fashion, subjectivities and spatialities' Gender, Place and Culture, Vol. 12, No. 4: 433-446. Longhurst, R. (2006) "Hot Mamas': pregnant, proud and sexy' ACME. An International S-journal for Critical Geographies, Vol. 51, No. 1: 1-22. Longhurst, R. (2008) Maternities: Gender, Bodies and Space, New York: Routledge. Madge, C. and O'Connor, H. (2002) 'On-line with e-mums: exploring the internet as a medium for research' Area, Vol. 34: 92-102. Madge, C. and O'Connor, H. (2005) 'Mothers in the making? Exploring liminality in cyber/space' Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers, Vol. 30, No. 1: 83-97. Madge, C. and O'Connor, H. (2006) 'Parenting gone wired: empowerment of new mothers on the internet?' Social and Cultural Geography, Vol. 7, No. 2: 199-220. Madge, C, Noxolo, P. and Raghuram, P. (2004) 'Bodily contours: geography, metaphor and pregnancy' WGSG, Geography and Gender Reconsidered, 68-83. Mahon-Daly, P. and Andrews, G.J. (2002) 'Liminality and breastfeeding: women negotiating space and two bodies' Health & Place, Vol. 8, No. 2: 61-76. Nast, H. and Pile, S. editors (1998) Places Through the Body, London: Routledge. Parr, H, (2002) 'New body-geographies: the embodied spaces of health and medical information on the Internet' Environment and Planning D: Society and Space, Vol. 20, No. 1: 73-95. Pollock, D. (1999) Telling Bodies, Performing Birth, New York: Columbia University Press. Ram, K. and Jolly, M. editors (1998) Maternities and Modernities: Colonial and Postcolonial Experiences in Asia and the Pacific, Cambridge: Cambridge: University Press. Rose, G. (2001) Visual Methodologies, London: Sage. Rose, G. (2004) "Everyone's cuddled up and it just looks really nice': an emotional geography of some mums and their family photos' Social &. Cultural Geography, Vol. 5, No. 4: 549-564. Sharpe, S. (1999) 'Bodily speaking: spaces and experiences of childbirth' in Teather, E. (1999) editor Embodied Geographies: Spaces, Bodies and Rites of Passage, London: Routledge, 91-103. Skeggs, B. (1997) Formations of Class and Gender, London: Sage. Smith, D.S. (2000) Moral Geographies: Ethics in a World of Difference, Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. Taormino, T. (2002) 'Hot Mamas: Pregnant women are hot' The Village Voice http:// www.villagevoice.com/issues/0241/taormino.php (accessed 4 October 2002). Tyler, I. (2001) 'Skin-tight: celebrity, pregnancy and subjectivity' in Ahmed, S. and Stacey, J. editors Thinking Through the Skin, London: Routledge, 69-83. Tyler, I. (2008) "Chav mum, chav scum': class disgust in contemporary Britain' Feminist Media Studies, Vol. 8, No. 1: 17-34. youTube broadcast yourself (2008) http://www.youtube.com, (accessed June-December 2008). youTube fact sheet (2008) http^/www.youtube.com/t/fact.sheet, (accessed 5 November 2008). doi:10.1057/fr.2009.22 Robyn Longhurst fern i n ¡st review 93 2009 63This content downloaded from 157.253.50.50 on Mon, 01 Oct 2018 16:11:14 UTCAll use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms