Youtube: Where Cultural Memory and Copyright Converge
Author(s): Lucas Hilderbrand
Source: Film Quarterly, Vol. 61, No. 1 (Fall 2007), pp. 48-57
Published by: University of California Press
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1525/fq.2007.61.1.48
Accessed: 01-10-2018 16:11 UTC
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a widerange of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity andfacilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available athttps://about.jstor.org/terms
University of California Press is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend
access to Film Quarterly
This content downloaded from 157.253.50.50 on Mon, 01 Oct 2018 16:11:33 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
48 FALL 2007
YOUTUBE: WHERE CULTURAL MEMORY
AND COPYRIGHT CONVERGE
LUCAS HILDERBRAND CONSIDERS TO WHAT EXTENT THE INCREASED ACCESS THAT
YOUTUBE ENABLES IS OUTWEIGHED BY THE ONLINE REGULATION IT PROMPTS
Let’s begin with a clip: William Shatner’s infamous 1986 appearance
on Saturday Night Live when he told a convention
of Trekkies to “get a life” during a sketch. This scene signaled
a defi ning moment in media refl exivity and public awareness
of fan cultures, as well as inspired the opening of Henry Jenkins’s
1992 book Textual Poachers. The fi rst time I presented
some of the material that follows, I used a clip of this sketch
as an illustration of content uploaded to YouTube that refl
ects and replays pop-cultural memory. But by the time I
reworked my presentation for a conference about a month
later, the clip had disappeared. Perhaps something like this
has happened to you, too.
YouTube has become the go-to website for fi nding topical
and obscure streaming video clips, but everyday experiences
also indicate how fl eeting such access can be. Viewers
and academics have quickly come to treat the site as an informal
archive of television texts.Yet, as I argue in this article,
even though YouTube and sites like it have expanded access
to a rich spectrum of such material and suggested the potential
for democratization of media memories and fl ows, they
also introduce new ways to regulate and deny access to content
under the guise of enforcing copyright protection.
WEB VIDEO
At the forefront of web video, YouTube has been called
“viral,” “revolutionary,” and a “phenomenon.” Within a few
short months of the streaming video website’s public launch
in December 2005, tens of millions of visitors daily used the
site to access television clips online and, in many cases, to
post some of their own. Further marking YouTube the medium
of its moment, Time magazine named “You” (referencing
YouTube) the Person of the Year for 2006.1 Rather than
being promoted by multi-million-dollar branding campaigns
by major networks or tech fi rms, YouTube became popular by
word of mouth—which in the Internet era means forwarded
email links, blogs, and MySpace profi les. (Or, for those older
than the “Me Media” generation, articles in the New York
Times or elsewhere.) The videos available on YouTube include
home videos and remixes, up-to-the-minute television
excerpts, music videos, trailers, commercials, and highlights
from television history posted by users—and increasingly by
producers and the networks themselves. (For commentary on
the site’s content, see the sidebar “The Clip Canon.”)
Despite all the hype surrounding the speed of YouTube’s
popularity, television–computer convergence has been a
long-expected prospect. In the mid-1990s, tech companies,
networks, and Internet service providers were already speculating
about their future merger and the resulting potential
for exact target marketing.2 Microsoft purchased WebTV
in 1996 but failed to capture a media monopoly to complement
its software empire. In the intervening decade, digital
developments such as DVDs, DVRs (Digital Video Recorders,
such as TiVo), video-on-demand services, peer-to-peer
(p2p) fi le-sharing networks, and iPods have contributed to
the changes in how viewers receive and watch television.
The swiftness with which the stakes surrounding YouTube
have changed in its fi rst year and a half demonstrate just how
diffi cult it is to rigorously assess cultural and technological
developments in their present moment. For instance, an otherwise
insightful book about “the transition from network to
networked TV” published as recently as 2006 completely
missed the YouTube phenomenon.3 With the expansion of
high-speed connections and growing computer memory capacities,
Internet video distribution—from BitTorrent downloading
to short-form streaming—has at long last become
viable on a massive scale. Yet, when the promise of television
online fi nally became palpable, it was not in the way corporations
and the digirati had predicted in the 1990s. Indeed, if
the histories of communications technologies have taught us
anything, audiences rarely adopt and use media in the ways
they were originally envisioned. YouTube, like popular p2ps
Film Quarterly, Vol. 61, No. 1, pps 48–57, ISSN 0015-1386, electronic ISSN 1533-8630. © 2007 by the Regents of the University of California.
All rights reserved. Please direct all requests for permission to photocopy or reproduce article content through the University of California Press’s
Rights and Permissions website, http://www.ucpressjournals.com/reprintinfo.asp. DOI: 10.1525/FQ.2007.61.1.48
This content downloaded from 157.253.50.50 on Mon, 01 Oct 2018 16:11:33 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
before it, was developed by a couple of young guys who wrote
the basic programming code and millions of home viewers
who developed its uses.4
YouTube and similar sites offer new and remediating relationships
to texts that indicate changes and acceleration of
spectatorial consumption. YouTube’s success has been attributed
in large part to its user-friendliness. Users do not need
to log-in in order to view clips, and videos start streaming as
soon as the webpage loads, so there is no need to worry about
software compatibility, downloading fi les, or even clicking
the “play” button. On the interface, videos appear with a
scrollable sidebar of other videos that search results have concluded
are of related interest, so users can click through from
one clip to another without doing multiple searches. This
mode of hyperlinking effectively replicates channel-surfi ng
and introduces non-narrative seriality to the viewing experience.
Frequently, as well, searches for an iconic or controversial
moment of television will yield multiple clips of the
same content, with minor variations in image quality, running
time, titling, keywords, or spellings. Deciding which
clip among the batch to view may depend upon clues such as
the thumbnail image or running time (to get the most complete
or, contrarily, the most effi cient clip) or simply the rules
of peer-review popularity (users give clips star ratings, and the
number of times each clip has been viewed is also tracked for
users’ ready reference). Beyond its ease of use, however, its
vast collection seems to be the primary draw.
YouTube has contributed to a culture of the clip. The
specifi c moments a viewer wants to see can now be searched
and accessed without the hassles of watching live broadcasts,
making recordings, or waiting through exposition and commercial
breaks. In the process, it fosters a new temporality
of immediate gratifi cation for audiences. As soon as the red
bar across the bottom of the playback frame indicates how
much of the streaming video is ready to view, users can actually
drag the cursor to scan ahead to arrive at the moment
they seek even quicker. Suddenly, three minutes can seem
like a life-sucking eternity, and I, for one, am prone to skipping
ahead or moving on before a clip fi nishes if it is the least
bit tedious.
Although I am making a claim for the site’s centrality in
accessing historical clips, instantaneity is one of its primary
virtues. Users post television clips almost as soon at they have
been broadcast, which allows viewers who missed a politician’s
faux pas or bits of incisive satire to see the relevant material
in time to participate in water-cooler conversations. Of
course, rights owners can and do insist that such popular clips
be taken down almost as quickly. It has become fairly common
for blog readers to click through an embedded clip from
the previous night’s television broadcast, only to fi nd that the
footage has been taken off-line in the few hours that elapsed
between the post and the reader’s attempted playback. This
has become so common that bloggers even signal the likelihood
of this outcome, by suggesting readers click through
while they can. Even newsworthy public events are not immune.
Perhaps the most publicized and outrageous single
take-down to date came when public affairs network C-SPAN
ordered the removal of Stephen Colbert’s tongue-in-cheek
speech at the White House Correspondents’ Dinner in May
2006, which had been watched 2.7 million times within fortyeight
hours on YouTube and which clearly satirized the state
of political journalism.5 This viewership statistic suggests
that more viewers saw the speech on YouTube than during
its original transmission, and that, as outrageous as it seems,
even offi cial governmental events can be subject to restrictive
copyright claims. On the fl ip side, the site has also been used
The YouTube interface: playback controls, user comments,
related and featured clips
Viacom-owned CBS hosts a branded “channel” on YouTube
FILM QUARTERLY 49
This content downloaded from 157.253.50.50 on Mon, 01 Oct 2018 16:11:33 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
as a vehicle for grassroots alternative media to expose political
gaffes, corporate exploitation, police violence, or the realities
of the battlefront in Iraq. Once publicized on YouTube, these
events and issues at times get taken up in the mainstream
press. In many cases, this feeds the greater good, though at
other times a few seconds of video can cause such a scandal
that they may ruin a campaign or damage an entire political
career. And, rather than diversifying what audiences see, topical
viral videos (viral in the sense of epidemic) reinforce the
cultural dominance of specifi c media clips.
The high viewership of short-lived clips—such as those
mentioned in blogs or even reported in the traditional press—
reintroduce the dialectic of ubiquity and ephemerality that
has, historically, been the model of much of popular culture,
especially broadcasting. The intervention of home video
recording opened up the possibility for home audiences to
catch up on live broadcasts that they may have missed or of
vintage moments they wish to re-experience. Videotape induced
audience expectations for access—whether for home
video releases of theatrical feature fi lms approximately six
months after their debuts or for fi lm classics, video art, or
television shows that someone, somewhere must have recorded.
The Internet, Google, and YouTube have accelerated
and exaggerated these expectations for availability. But
YouTube reminds audiences that such content, once in their
grasp, can still be temporary. The initial novelty and glee at
fi nding an unexpected clip soon gives way to frustration and
disbelief when searches for something else come up matchless—
or, increasingly, when a desired clip has been de-activated
for copyright violation. Perhaps more than at any time
before, audiences and users seem to reject the content industry’s
proprietary claims, complaining when a video goes
offl ine or even reposting new versions of formerly disabled
clips. Expectations for access have developed into a sense of
access entitlement.
Despite many unrealized promises for digital media in
the past decade or so, a surprising number of digital technology
advocates and scholars remain celebratory in their rhetoric
that technology has profoundly changed our culture, and
continue to claim that in the near future all content will be
digital, interactive, and shared. As a reporter for Wired magazine
asserted, “Without being overly simplistic or melodramatic,
the state of the Old Commercial Broadcasting Model
can be summarized like this: a spiraling vortex of ruin.”6 I
am far more skeptical. For mass audiences, broadcast, cable,
and satellite television still dominate (not least because of
class issues such as the digital divide—that is, uneven access
to technology—or even the bourgeois pleasures of narrative
structures and slick production values), and network content
will continue to feed these streams. And I suspect that for
many audiences, network content—new or old—still drives
users to YouTube, and amateur content is discovered along
the way, through the suggested links, alternate search results,
or forwarded emails.
Although some cultural critics have predicted that You-
Tube will displace the established corporate media, You-
Tube’s popularity relies at least in part upon recirculated
selections of mainstream media.7 As has been historically apparent
with entertainment technologies, initial novelty often
gives way to familiar content. Convergence usually means
content redundancy across platforms, and YouTube perhaps
relies more on mainstream media for source material than it
threatens to displace it.8 Given this situation, the confl ict becomes
not only about what media audiences watch, but who
can control and profi t from it.
CULTURAL MEMORY
YouTube has given renewed public lives to thousands or even
millions of now-“classic” moments from television, and offers
access to a rich spectrum of important footage of history-
shaping events and of otherwise unavailable or obscure
nuggets of popular culture. Available clips range from CNN
coverage of the Challenger space shuttle explosion (1986) to
footage of Los Angeles police beating Rodney King (1991),
from the Disney-animated The Story of Menstruation (1946)
to Crispin Glover playing up his eccentricities on Late Night
with David Letterman (1987). In cases such as commercials
and talk-show highlights, signifi cant but small-scale ephemera
has historically been the hardest content for fans or even
historians to track down and re-experience. This Internet
library has fed scholarly as well as nostalgic uses.
Culled from users’ personal collections of recordings
and productions, the site’s videos and its search engine offer
some evidence of what from television’s past now constitutes
our cultural memory—a concept that suggests the idiosyncratic
ways that personal experience, popular culture,
and historical narratives intersect. So much of our personal
and social memories are comprised of televised news coverage,
commercials, or scenes in bad sit-coms. YouTube
allows users to seek out the media texts that have shaped
them and that would otherwise be forgotten in “objective”
histories. Like memory (cultural or personal), YouTube is
dynamic. It is an ever-changing clutter of stuff from the
user’s past, some of which disappears and some of which
remains overlooked, while new material is constantly being
accrued and new associations or (literally, hypertext) links
are being made. The images are often hazy but may suffi ce
to induce recall or to fi ll in where
50 FALL 2007
continued on page 54
This content downloaded from 157.253.50.50 on Mon, 01 Oct 2018 16:11:33 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
FILM QUARTERLY 51
THE CLIP CANON
“soap opera” created by three aspiring screenwriters and an
actress. The hoax called into question the authenticity of
video blogs generally.
OK Go, “Here I Go Again”
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pv5zWaTEVkI
Category: music video
Copyright status: original (posted by record label)
This hipster pop group has staked its fame on ironic
synchronized dance routines in videos that have gone viral.
In “Here I Go Again,” the four band members glide, hop,
and turn in sync on a treacherous course of treadmills. The
band members perform the number as if it were an elaborate
joke—which, of course, it would be if the scene wasn’t so
well choreographed and rehearsed.
“Dick in a Box”
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1dmVU08zVpA
Category: network content
Copyright status: original (posted by network)
The Saturday Night Live digital short “Lazy Sunday” became
one of the most popular early postings on YouTube—
and was the fi rst high-profi le clip to be removed at the request
of its rights owner. A year later, this SNL short became another
YouTube favorite, but this time NBC posted the
clip—in its un-bleeped, non-broadcast version. In the music
video parody sketch “Dick,” Andy Samberg and host Justin
In the main article, I have focused on old content that has
become newly accessible through YouTube and on the intellectual
property issues that video-posting and sharing raise.
With millions of different clips posted to the site, it would be
impossible to offer a comprehensive analysis of its content.
Yet, among all the amateur music videos, fan tributes, talking
heads, pet vids, laughing babies, stunts, and TV shows, a minority
of clips have been seen and shared millions of times.
In the culture of the clip, spectacles, stunts, cuteness, pop
culture references, and exhibitionism all trump narrative.
Here, then, is a capsule survey of some of the most viewed
and most talked-about clips from YouTube’s fi rst couple of
years—twelve candidates for the YouTube canon.
“Evolution of Dance”
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dMH0bHeiRNg
Category: most viewed
Copyright status: appropriative (clearing music rights would
be both logistically challenging and costly)
With the most viewed clip in YouTube history, “Inspirational
Comedian” Judson Laipply performs iconic dance
moves to a frenetic megamix of thirty songs in six minutes.
This clip would seem an unlikely hit: the amateurish footage
presents a long take of a balding white guy performing in
a glaring spotlight with the acoustics of home video shot in
an auditorium. Yet, Laipply cleverly and nimbly switches between
dance styles. Most of the songs are instantly recognizable,
and the crowd cheers every transition as he moves from
Elvis’s knee fl ares to disco, head-banging, the chicken dance,
and the Macarena. My personal favorite: the MC Hammerstyle
sideways shuffl e.
lonelygirl15
http://www.youtube.com/profi le?user=lonelygirl15
Category: most notorious
Copyright status: original
One of the most popular video bloggers and arguably the
fi rst YouTube star was lonelygirl15, a teenager named Bree.
In her postings, she talked about her ambiguously romantic
relationship with her best friend, cryptically referenced her
religion, attempted to “prove science wrong,” and responded
to viewer comments. The short episodes began in mid-June
2006. In September lonelygirl15 was exposed as a fi ctional
This content downloaded from 157.253.50.50 on Mon, 01 Oct 2018 16:11:33 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
52 FALL 2007
“Brokeback to the Future”
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8uwuLxrv8jY
Category: fan video/trailer slash
Copyright status: appropriative
Trailer re-mixes have become one of the most popular
forms of fan subversion in the age of digital video. Amidst the
hype surrounding Brokeback Mountain’s release, a fl ood of
clips reworked homosocial male buddy fi lms to expose their
homoerotic subtexts. Faithfully mimicking the structure of
the offi cial Brokeback trailer and using its signature score, the
best of these slash clips revisits the Back to the Future trilogy.
Also check out the seminal parody reinvention of Stanley Kubrick’s
The Shining as a light-hearted family comedy.
Hillary Clinton/”1984” parody
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6h3G-lMZxjo
Category: political campaign/culturejamming
Copyright status: appropriative
The fi rst controversial attack ad of the 2008 U.S. presidential
election was an instant culturejamming classic.
The creator reworked Apple’s famous Ridley Scott-directed
“1984” advertisement announcing the Macintosh with video
clips of candidate Hillary Rodham Clinton as Big Brother.
Clever and technically sophisticated, this unauthorized spot
plugged Barack Obama, who in turn refused to condemn it.
The original Mac ad can also easily be found on YouTube for
comparison—or for a quick tutorial in advertising and computer
history.
Timberlake, dressed and sounding like white boy throwbacks
to early-1990s sexed-up R&B ballads, sing about giving their
girlfriends “something real” for Christmas.
Two Chinese boys
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x1LZVmn3p3o
Category: lip-synch
Copyright status: appropriative
Lip-synch videos, featuring teenagers giving exaggerated
performances to their webcams, rank among the most pervasive
genres on YouTube. To be frank, the appeal of these
karaoke videos is pretty much lost on me, but their sheer prevalence
and apparent popularity make them one of the central
genres of the forum. Cross-cultural interpretations, such as
these two Chinese students mugging to the Backstreet Boys’
“I Want It That Way” are especially popular. See also: the
“Numa Numa” post and its copycats.
Nora, the piano-playing cat
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TZ860P4iTaM
Category: cute animals
Copyright status: original (possible underlying rights for
music played in background)
Home videos of pets rank among the most popular amateur
videos on YouTube, especially clips of cats leaping,
screeching, or falling down. But probably the most famous
single cat is Nora, a feline that purportedly plays piano. Nora
sits at the bench and paws one note at a time with apparent
concentration, but don’t expect any actual melodic progressions.
Nora’s celebrity was so newsworthy that a sequel clip
premiered on CNN.
This content downloaded from 157.253.50.50 on Mon, 01 Oct 2018 16:11:33 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
FILM QUARTERLY 53
Mentos and Diet Coke experiments
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AkkOUPYNs7I
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hKoB0MHVBvM
Category: stunts
Copyright status: original (though trademark owners Diet
Coke and Mentos may not be happy)
Mix half-chewed Mentos candies with a large bottle of
Diet Coke, and the reaction produces a foamy eruption. You-
Tube hosts numerous variations on this chemistry experiment-
turned-stunt. These are my two favorites. In the fi rst, a
guy throws a Diet Coke bottle rocket down against the pavement,
and it ricochets clear past the roof of a two-story house.
The second, more elaborate clip features two men in lab
coats and goggles who unleash 101 bottles in sequence to
create a fi zzy fountain that unfolds in geyser-tastic spectacle.
Parkour
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uUksaD-JJgI
Category: sports/stunts
Copyright status: original (may have underlying music rights
to clear)
The numerous videos about Parkour, a French sport of
high-speed, daredevil urban acrobatics, suggest that YouTube
can introduce audiences to previously obscure athletic forms.
Parkour was the raison d être for the hit French fl ick District
B-13 and made a cameo in Casino Royale. But video clips
such as this British one take the action back to the streets,
with stunning and often dangerous stunts that mix gymnastics,
breakdancing, and martial arts, as young men run, jump,
and fl ip. Also on the sports beat, for instant (or incessant) replays,
check out Zinedine Zidane’s controversial head-butt
during the 2006 World Cup.
“Noah takes a photo of himself every day for 6 years”
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6B26asyGKDo
Category: self-documentation
Copyright status: original
Blogs, MySpace, cameraphones, and other digital
technologies have introduced proliferating modes of autobiography.
2356 days in the making, Noah Kalina shot
self-portraits daily between 2000 and 2006, then put them
together as an animated slide show. The framing and facial
expressions remain remarkably consistent throughout,
and the Philip Glass-esque piano score (credited as original
music by Carly Comando) accentuate the repetition of the
video’s structure and its melancholy mood. Unlike many
self-indulgent clips that refl ect an exacerbated culture of
narcissism, this is an arresting and almost moving study of
maturing.
Saddam Hussein execution
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6tVG5_F5Ado
Category: snuff/current events
Copyright status: unclear
YouTube isn’t all crazy cats and teenage goofs. It also
appeals to morbid and prurient interest, as the popularity
of copies of a cameraphone recording of Hussein’s hanging
demonstrate.
This content downloaded from 157.253.50.50 on Mon, 01 Oct 2018 16:11:33 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
54 FALL 2007
we could only previously imagine
how things were from written or word-of-mouth accounts.
One of the dangers of seeing once-formative content on
YouTube is being underwhelmed in the present; such disillusioning
effects are probably only enhanced by the low
resolution of the video stream. But these disappointments
of history alternate with delightful discoveries.
YouTube introduces a new model of media access and
amateur historiography that, while the images are imperfect
and the links are impermanent, nonetheless realizes much of
the Internet’s potential to circulate rare, ephemeral, and elusive
texts. As documents, the low-resolution postings to You-
Tube fall far short of archival preservation, and excerpting
changes the fl ow and format of broad/cable-cast content. Archivists
and librarians have criticized the site not only for circulating
low-resolution copies of unauthorized content but
also for skewing general perceptions that sites such as You-
Tube may render traditional archives irrelevant and introduce
unrealistic demands for access.
YouTube functions both as a portal of cultural memory
and as a concept, but it does not operate as an archive in the
proper sense of the word. Perceptions of its popularity have
had a snowball effect on YouTube’s prevalence for both uploads
and streaming, thus making it the de facto repository
for video clips—at least until they are deactivated. YouTube
is only the most famous of a proliferation of web video sites,
but as the best-known, it has become a centralized repository
and probably the fi rst place users search for content. It has
not only become the default site, but it is also becoming the
generic term for conversational references to web video clips
and sharing—much the way Barbie, Xerox, Kleenex, or Coke
can be used to describe a type of product beyond a specifi c
brand name.
Memory media are mediated—and look it, as old video
clips seem to exhibit a surface haze of worn old video. Streaming
clips on YouTube refl ect the aesthetics of access; reduced
resolution becomes a trade-off for quick and easy use—an
issue that has recurred across various technologies, from photocopies
to VHS tapes to MP3s. In a word, YouTube clips
look and sound terrible. Off-air recordings get compressed,
and source webcams and camera-phone images look blocky
and jerky from the moment of creation; delays in streaming
exacerbate the effects of both. Videos that may look acceptable
in miniature reveal low resolution if blown up to fullscreen.
And digitization of analog source recordings take
color saturation down a few notches while introducing pixelation.
The YouTube recordings further remediate content
and inscribe its sources onto the recordings. The homemade
status of many television clips is marked by station identifi -
cation logos in the corner of the frame and, in the cases of
older recordings, VHS artifacts such as rainbows of discoloration
and signal drop-out. Such artifacts and alterations indexically
signal the videos’ sources and demonstrate bootleg
aesthetics.9 Clips that circulate beyond YouTube, as embedded
videos on other websites, feature branded YouTube watermarks.
The identities of uploaders and comment posters are
also inscribed on the interface, so that there is some record of
where the footage came from and where it has gone.
If YouTube can be said to facilitate communication, it
is in ways that emphasize video over epistolary exchange.
Friends, family, and co-workers can easily email hotlinks for
already-posted videos of cute critters or comical blasts from
the past to each other, and typically do so with minimal if
any written explanations; forwarding YouTube videos can sustain
email contact between people with pre-established relationships
without the effort of writing personal narratives.
In terms of forging new connections, two prevalent types of
user-generated posts have emerged: fi rst, talking-head webcam
videos of users spouting off extemporaneous rants in
response to the clips they watch and, second, more elaborate
parodies of popular videos. Despite designated spaces on
the YouTube interface for descriptions about videos and for
feedback from viewers, the potential for written communication
via the site seems to be mostly unrealized. Browsing the
posted user comments reveals a lot of plugs for posters’ own
clips, spam, chain letters, and racist or homophobic fl ames
(insults). When users do make comments, they are typically
brief and not terribly enlightening, along the lines of, “lol.
very funny!!!!!!” Written dialogue remains the domain of
blogs and chat rooms.
As a forum for self-syndication and post-broadcast networking,
YouTube has elicited considerable discourses of
“community” and “sharing.” Co-founder Chad Hurley has
commented, “People like to share experiences . . . We started
it with the idea of solving a problem—how to share video
online with your friends.”10 A market analyst was quoted in
the New York Times as saying, “‘YouTube fi gured out what
Google and Yahoo and Microsoft and all the others in the
marketplace didn’t,’ she said. ‘It’s not about the video. It’s
about creating a community around the video.’”11 As its slogan
“Broadcast Yourself” suggests, YouTube fosters exhibitionistic
and narcissistic amateur video streams; it is tempting
to suggest that user-generated content on YouTube is more
about promoting oneself than about exchanging ideas with
others. Clips that excerpt or rework texts from TV’s past, in
contrast, indicate a desire to reclaim a shared cultural memory.
And, of course, these are the clips most at risk of being
taken off-line by their rights owners.
continued from page 50
This content downloaded from 157.253.50.50 on Mon, 01 Oct 2018 16:11:33 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
FILM QUARTERLY 55
COPYRIGHT
Copyright has been at the center of public attention to You-
Tube, and it sets the terms on which much of personal (and
scholarly) access to media texts will be available. It is also the
major question that has overshadowed YouTube’s success.
How long will YouTube survive in an age of aggressive antipiracy
campaigns and lawsuits—content industry movements
that have largely been supported by Congress and the courts?
Google purchased YouTube for $1.6 billion in October 2006,
making it worth suing.12 Videos may easily be found through
keyword searches on the site or simply through a general web
search on Google. In this sense, its design as a search engine
matched Google’s business model and allowed for integration
with Google’s own fl edgling video databases when the
company acquired YouTube.
With all the attention YouTube has received as the central
portal of web video clips, it had seemed inevitable that
some media conglomerate or other would sue YouTube for
copyright infringement. If anything, it actually took longer
than one might have expected. In March 2007, Viacom sued
YouTube and Google for $1 billion.13 The lawsuit followed
Viacom’s failed attempts to negotiate a cooperative deal (negotiations
reportedly continue concurrent with litigation)
and hundreds of thousands of requests for YouTube to disable
clips of Viacom properties The Daily Show, The Colbert
Report, and South Park. Advocates of digital content sharing
and remixing have pointed out the irony that Stephen Colbert
repeatedly referenced and encouraged YouTube clips
and remixes on his show. Whether or not Viacom sees some
fi nancial reward for its litigation, this is the type of case that
seems bound for the Supreme Court, to follow in the wake of
its major precedents: Sony v. Universal (1984, known colloquially
as “the Betamax case”) and MGM v. Grokster (2005,
which shut down Kazaa-like p2p network Grokster for enabling
unauthorized music sharing).
Copyright law was developed to stimulate publication of
new works for the edifi cation of culture. At base, copyright allows
rights owners the right of publication and, in exchange
for offering cultural works for public consumption, of profi ting
from such publication. This form of legal regulation was
intended to foster a vibrant and continuing stream of new
cultural works, though legislation and court rulings have increasingly
favored rights owners over their audiences of late.
Numerous copyright scholars have suggested that such shifts
have betrayed the law’s original purpose. For analog media,
content owners not only fi nancially benefi t from publication,
but they also have considerable control in deciding how content
will enter the marketplace.
The same basic issues are at stake, if complicated, in the
era of digital networks when peer-sharing and video streaming
are more or less indistinguishable from publication. In
many cases, rights owners request to have streaming YouTube
videos disabled not necessarily because they are competing
with owners’ own residual marketing but because they want
to maintain some kind of control over what is publicly accessible
and how it is distributed. Digital technologies and
policies have facilitated rapid and more drastic methods of
disabling the documents that feed cultural memories and enable
scholarship. Hardware is now regularly engineered to
prevent copying and to disable unauthorized uses, and the
1998 Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA) forbids
hacking encryption technologies and allows for offended parties
to demand that online content be taken off-line without
due process to prove infringement. As Lawrence Lessig has
suggested, in such situations the layers of “code”—the hardware,
the software, and the content—are typically all owned
or controlled by corporations with vested interests in regulating
them.14
Although it should perhaps go without saying, copyright
should concern anyone interested in fi lm and media because
it has long been the primary legal means of regulating access
to texts. When access is restricted or forbidden, not only
do viewers lose out, but textual scholars can be severely inhibited
as well when key texts simply are not available to be
studied or taught. I would go so far as to suggest that You-
Tube has had a major impact on how television history can
be taught by opening up access to a wealth of clips that
The Electronic Frontier Foundation’s parody of The
Incredibles: a warning about restrictive copyright laws
This content downloaded from 157.253.50.50 on Mon, 01 Oct 2018 16:11:33 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
56 FALL 2007
pro fessors may have longed for but been unable to locate;
the site is in credibly useful for reference, just as the Inter net
Movie Database and Wikipedia—despite (overblown) criticisms
of their accuracy—conveniently fi ll in such information
as credits, dates, and historical events. Furthermore,
students can make curriculum peer-produced by forwarding
relevant links to their instructors and classmates.
To be clear, I am suggesting that YouTube does not promote
willy-nilly piracy but rather enables access to culturally
signifi cant texts that would otherwise be elusive and the
ability to repurpose videos in the creation of new derivative
works. In other words, the site and its users (and I) advocate
for what copyright is supposed to do. Furthermore, litigation—
whether based upon a legitimate legal claim or merely
a scare tactic and form of economic intimidation—can have
inhibiting effects far more sweeping than the specifi c rule of
law. Copyright matters, and YouTube has become one of the
most prominent and popular sites where what’s actually legal
law is being contested and potentially curtailed.
In terms of copyright, the user-uploaded content streamed
via YouTube falls into roughly three categories: copied, appropriative,
and original. The copied texts derive primarily
from users’ television recordings, clipped into bite-sized portions
without intended alteration of the source material other
than excerpting. This is perhaps the most sought-after category,
especially for catching up with topical TV moments or
nostalgic clips. Appropriated clips often include copyrighted
music or footage used in the service of new derivative works;
such uses range from amateur music videos as users dance
and lip-synch to popular songs in their bedrooms, to complex
fan, slash or culturejamming re-edits of footage. Original
content would mean any video footage that does not incorporate
previously copyrighted works, such as home movies,
video diaries, and small-scale productions. There are also innumerable
versions, imitations, and parodies of both corporate
and amateur content. All three categories are prevalent,
including original content, which helps bolster the claim that
the site can and is used for substantial non-infringing uses. In
many cases, what appears to be the same clip has been uploaded
by different users, thus blurring distinctions between
authorship, ownership, and distribution rights.
In the wake of court rulings against the p2ps Napster and
Grokster, the copyright crisis has haunted otherwise celebratory
predictions of the website. In the Betamax case, which
legalized home recording with VCRs, the Supreme Court
came to three signifi cant conclusions: fi rst, that home video
recorders must be allowed because of their potential for noninfringing
uses; second, that the dominant uses of the machines
were for timeshifting (recording television programs
off air for belated viewing), which the Supreme Court considered
fair use; and third, that Sony could not be held liable for
its customers’ misuses of the machines. The court saw fi t to expand
the defi nition of fair use—reproduction of copyrighted
content for educational uses—to include personal consumptive
uses as a way to broaden the potential audiences for television
programming and serve a broader public interest. This
ruling expanded the domain of fair use beyond orthodox interpretations,
thus setting a curious but progressive precedent.
The judges were clearly aware that some home tapers did, in
fact, elide or fast-forward through commercials when timeshifting,
and that some video collectors built home libraries of
tapes. But for the court, the legitimate and potentially benefi -
cial uses of the technology outweighed such violations.
Although YouTube may superfi cially resemble the
peer-to-peer networks as a means of unauthorized content
redistribution, I suggest that all of the judicial reasons that ultimately
protected VCRs can and should reasonably apply to
YouTube. YouTube cannot be completely shut down due to
the indisputable volume of material that in no way infringes
copyright and that can be argued to refl ect the experiences
and ideas of a generation and possibly even a whole cultural
moment. The content industry’s interests in the site may suffi
ce to maintain its architecture—and, by extension, to sustain
a space for amateur and bootleg media fl ows. Even if
YouTube itself implodes, the technology for video sharing remains
available, and viewer desire seems suffi cient to drive
video sharing to alternative venues.
The failure of the Betamax precedent to save the p2ps
should not be seen to limit its viability for YouTube. Judicial
perceptions that Napster and Grokster did not have signifi
cant non-infringing uses and that the network managers
could have intervened to disable infringing content were
central to their undoing. Distinguishing YouTube from these
peer-to-peer networks, users do not download the video fi les
to their own computers but instead watch them as streaming
Flash fi les and only redistribute them as emailed or embedded
links. When the copyright question arises, YouTube
representatives have cited the DMCA’s safe harbor provision
for Internet service providers, which shields companies that
provide technical infrastructure from liability for users’ infringements.
Further distinguishing YouTube from these peer-to-peer
networks, YouTube regulates uses of the site. At the time of
the Google purchase, YouTube was portrayed as a “good
corporate citizen,” one that may actually serve the content
industry’s interests.15 YouTube has demonstrated such self-
This content downloaded from 157.253.50.50 on Mon, 01 Oct 2018 16:11:33 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
FILM QUARTERLY 57
regulations as disabling clips that have been the subject of
take-down requests from copyright owners in compliance
with the DMCA or that have been deemed obscene by users.
The site’s inability—or refusal, depending on one’s point of
view—to stringently and preemptively monitor copyright
content has lead to criticism that it willingly hosts infringing
content to boost its bottom line. Meanwhile, YouTube’s
relatively stringent policies have spawned a proliferation of
knock-off sites that use similar technologies and interfaces to
provide access to such illicit content. This trend refl ects a
pre-existing pattern: the rise of alternative peer-to-peer services
when popular ones face legal trouble. In fact, killing off
YouTube may do more damage to the content industry than
good, if doing so eliminates the industry-friendly site.
In contrast to Viacom, some record labels, studios, and
networks use YouTube as a promotional platform by uploading
previews and pilots through branded “channels” or through
paid placement on the website’s front page.16 A handful, including
Viacom-owned CBS, have even struck licensing or
small-stake ownership agreements with the site. For a time,
it seemed that industry licensing agreements and the Google
purchase might have signaled a decisive shift in the content
industry’s war against so-called “piracy” and ensured the site’s
survival. YouTube has popularized online video viewing generally
and very likely driven traffi c to other sites, including
the networks’ own. Such mainstreaming of consumption patterns
and collaboration with the entertainment industry invariably
entails some compromises, but YouTube might have
been part of achieving an access equilibrium—and maybe it
still will be. Maybe the site has introduced a new paradigm
for online digital video sharing that builds upon the Betamax
decision’s protections in a way that can be reconciled with
the DMCA, but to negotiate these seemingly opposed policies,
it must do so in ways as complex, even imaginative, as
both the Betamax landmark decision and the digital copyright
laws. If YouTube and online video streaming continue
to be embraced by the industry, a court ruling may fi nd a way
within copyright to ensure the site’s survival as a way to protect
commerce—just as it did for VCRs.
In a technological, legal, and business sphere that has
so far undone most utopian predictions about new media,
my initial optimism about YouTube has given way to ambivalence.
The site may not be a perfect or perpetual way
to preserve content, but it has incredibly expanded access to
media content. Ultimately a commercial endeavor, the site
is not—and probably never has been—inherently utopian or
radical. Whatever YouTube’s future, its meteoric rise to popularity
and its role at the center of speculation about the near
future of video technology make it historically signifi cant. It
should also alert media scholars and audiences to the ways
that copyright can regulate video access and, by extension,
erase media memory.
1. Time, 25 December 2006.
2. See Ellen Seiter, “Television and the Internet,” in Television and New Media
Audiences (New York: Oxford University Press, 1999), 115–30, and Lisa Parks,
“Flexible Microcasting: Gender, Generation, and Television-Internet Convergence,”
in Television after TV, eds Lynn Spigel and Jan Olsson (Durham, NC:
Duke University Press, 2004), 133–56.
3. Shelly Palmer, Television Disrupted: The Transition from Network to Networked
TV (Burlington, MA: Focal Press, 2006).
4. YouTube was created by three PayPal alumni, still in their twenties: Steve
Chen, Chad Hurley, and Jawed Karim, who left the company to attend grad
school before it hit big.
5. C-SPAN later requested the take-down of a clip from Speaker of the House
Nancy Pelosi’s blog nine months later. See Noam Cohen, “Which Videos are
Protected? Lawmakers Get a Lesson,” New York Times, 26 February 2006 (accessed
online).
6. Bob Garfi eld, “YouTube vs Boob Tube,” Wired, December 2006 (http://
www.wired.com/wired/archive/14.12/youtube.html, accessed April 29, 2007).
7. See Sonja Baumer, “YouTube vs. Main Stream Media: Kissing Cousins or
Feuding Siblings?” Flow 5, no. 9 (March 2007). The conventional wisdom that
infringing clips are the most popular has been challenged by tracking service
Vidmeter, which found that clips subject to takedown requests made up less
than ten percent of content and only slightly more than fi ve percent of the page
views. Dan Mitchell, “YouTube’s Favorite Clips,” New York Times, 7 April 2007
(accessed online).
8. See Henry Jenkins, Convergence Culture: When Old and New Media Collide
(New York: New York University Press, 2006), 13–16.
9. I previously developed the idea of “bootleg aesthetics,” in “Grainy Days
and Mondays: Superstar and Bootleg Aesthetics,” Camera Obscura 57 (2004),
57–91.
10. Quoted in Sam McManis, “It’s You. It’s YouTube,” Sacramento Bee, 14
March 2006, n.p.
11. Charlene Li, quoted in Andrew Ross Sorkin and Peter Edmonston, “Google
Is Said to Set Sights on YouTube,” New York Times, 7 October 2006. As John
McMurria has observed, the “community” rhetoric was rampant and open to
dispute following the sale of YouTube to Google. See John McMurria, “The
YouTube Community,” Flow 5, no. 2 (2006), http://jot.communication.utexas.
edu/fl ow/?jot=view&id=1995.
12. This price refl ects market defl ation compared to the $5.7 billion Yahoo
paid for the short-lived broadcast.com, even during the economic resurgence
of the so-called web 2.0. This fi gure for broadcast.com appears in John Cloud,
“The YouTube Gurus,” Time, 25 December 2006, 69.
13. See Michael Learmonth, “Viacom Sues YouTube, Google,” Variety, 13
March 2007, and Jeremy W. Peters, “Viacom Sues Google over YouTube
Video Clips,” New York Times, 14 March 2007 (both accessed online).
14. Lawrence Lessig, The Future of Ideas: The Fate of the Commons in a Connected
World (New York: Vintage, 2002), 23–25. On “code,” see also Lessig,
Code: Version 2.0 (New York: Basic Books, 2006).
15. The description in quotation marks appears in a statement by a representative
of the Motion Picture Association of America in Andrew Wallenstein,
“Catch YouTube If You Can,” Hollywood Reporter, March 21, 2006, n.p.
16. Heather Green, “Waiting For the Payoff; The video-sharing Web site is a
runaway success—everywhere but on the bottom line,” Business Week, 18 September
2006, 56.
LUCAS HILDERBRAND is Assistant Professor of Film and Media Studies at the University
of California, Irvine. His book Inherent Vice: Bootleg Histories of Videotape and Copyright
is forthcoming from Duke University Press.
ABSTRACT At the forefront of online streaming video, YouTube has expanded access to
a rich spectrum of televisual material and suggests the potential for democratization of
media memories and fl ows. Yet, the site also introduces new ways to regulate and deny
access to such content under the guise of enforcing copyright.
KEYWORDS YouTube, streaming video, copyright, piracy, cultural memory
This content downloaded from 157.253.50.50 on Mon, 01 Oct 2018 16:11:33 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms