Palgrave Studies in Alternative Education Series Editors Helen Lees School of Education Newman University Birmingham, UK Michael Reiss UCL Institute of Education London, UK This series emerges out of a recent global rise of interest in and actual educational practices done with voice, choice, freedoms and interper.sonal thoughtfulness. From subversion to introversion, including alterna.tive settings of the state to alternative pathways of the private, the series embraces a diverse range of voices. Common to books in the series is a vision of education already in exis.tence and knowledge of education possible here and now. Theoretical ideas with potential to be enacted or influential in lived practice are also a part of what we offer with the books. This series repositions what we deem as valuable educationally by accepting the power of many different forces such as silence, love, joy, despair, confusion, curiosity, failure, attachments as all potentially viable, interesting, useful elements in educational stories. Nothing is rejected if it has history or record as being of worth to people educationally, nor does this series doubt or distrust compelling ideas of difference as relevant. We wish to allow mainstream and marginal practices to meet here without prejudice as Other but also with a view to ensuring platforms for the Other to find community and understanding with others. The following are the primary aims of the series: • To publish new work on education with a distinctive voice. • To enable alternative education to find a mainstream profile. • To publish research that draws with interdisciplinary expertise on per.tinent materials for interpersonal change or adjustments of approach towards greater voice. • To show education as without borders or boundaries placed on what is possible to think and do. If you would like to submit a proposal or discuss a project in more detail please contact: Helen Lees and Michael Reiss h.lees@newman.ac.uk & m.reiss@ucl.ac. uk or Eleanor Christie Eleanor.Christie@palgrave.com. The series will include both monographs and edited collections and Palgrave Pivot formats. More information about this series at http://www.palgrave.com/gp/series/15489 Vickie Curtis Online Citizen Science and the Widening of Academia Distributed Engagement with Research and Knowledge Production Vickie Curtis Wellcome Centre for Molecular Parasitology University of Glasgow Glasgow, UK Palgrave Studies in Alternative Education ISBN 978-3-319-77663-7 ISBN 978-3-319-77664-4 (eBook) https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-77664-4 Library of Congress Control Number: 2018936616 © The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s) 2018 This work is subject to copyright. All rights are solely and exclusively licensed by the Publisher, whether the whole or part of the material is concerned, specifically the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microfilms or in any other physical way, and transmission or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed. The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication does not imply, even in the absence of a specific statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use. The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the authors or the editors give a warranty, express or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or for any errors or omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations. Cover image © M. Angelo/Fuse/Getty Printed on acid-free paper This Palgrave Macmillan imprint is published by the registered company Springer International Publishing AG part of Springer Nature. The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerland Acknowledgements Much of this work was carried out at the Institute of Educational Technology at the Open University in the United Kingdom, and was gen.erously funded by the OU’s Centre for Research into Education and Educational Technology (CREET). I received guidance and support from Professor Richard Holliman, Professor Eileen Scanlon and Dr Ann Jones for which I am extremely grateful. I also received invaluable advice from other colleagues at the OU particularly Dr Trevor Collins. Thanks also to Professor Michael Reiss from the Institute of Education at University College London, for suggesting and encouraging me to write this book. This research would not have been possible without access to the three online citizen science projects that have been the focus of my work. I would like to thank Professor David Baker, Professor Zoran Popovich and Dr Seth Cooper of Foldit; Professor Vijay Pande of Folding@home; and Professor Chris Lintott of the Zooniverse and Planet Hunters. I would also like to thank Jordan Raddick from the Zooniverse team, for providing me with data relating to participant activity on Planet Hunters, and to Dr Grant Miller, also of the Zooniverse, for providing an update on Planet Hunters (and the Zooniverse in general). I am also indebted to the many participants, scientists and developers who kindly took the time to answer my questions. My background is in the natural sciences and I came to social science research via a rather circuitous route. I found social science language and Acknowledgements methodology bewildering at first but was incredibly lucky to have access to some highly esteemed authorities while at the OU such as Professor Martyn Hammersley, Professor Stephanie Taylor and Professor John Richardson, whose seminars helped to fill in the gaps. I was also inspired by the highly accessible guides by Gary Thomas, Professor of Inclusion and Diversity at the University of Birmingham. Those looking for a clear  introduction to social science and qualitative research could find no better entry point. Finally, but by no means least, I would like to thank my family for their support and patience during the preparation of this book and while I was conducting my research, particularly my husband David, and my children, Rory and Dotty. Contents 1 Introduction: Distributed Approaches to Making Science 1 2 Exploring Online Citizen Science in Depth: A Tale of Three Projects 19 3 Who Takes Part in Online Citizen Science? 45 4 Motivation for Participation: From General Volunteerism to Online Citizen Science 69 5 A Closer Look at Motivation: Citizens and Scientists 93 6 Divisions of Labour: Patterns of Participation and Contribution 121 7 Participant Interaction: From Online Forums to Virtual Communities of Practice 143 8 Realising the Potential of Online Citizen Science 167 Index 189 List of Figures Fig. 2.1 Folding@Home screensaver 24 Fig. 2.2 Light curve (with transits marked) from the Planet Hunters tutorial 31 Fig. 2.3 Foldit tutorial puzzle 37 Fig. 2.4 Foldit science puzzle 38 Fig. 6.1 The ‘Reader-to-Leader’ framework (Preece and Schneiderman 2009) 129 Fig. 6.2 Pattern of participation in online citizen science projects 131 List of Tables Table 3.1  Demographic information collected from online citizen science studies  46  Table 3.2 Table 3.3 Table 3.4  Participation in science-related activities during the past year – Foldit Other science-related activities undertaken during the last 12 months – Folding@home Other science-related activities undertaken during the last 12 months – Planet Hunters  51 52 54  Table 4.1 Table 5.1  Summary of published studies exploring motivation in online citizen projects Motivation for participation in Foldit, Folding@home and Planet Hunters  78 98  Table 5.2  Motivational framework for online citizen science  107  Table 6.1 Table 6.2  Player roles within Foldit Main features of lightweight and heavyweight peer production (Haythornthwaite 2009)  126 130  1 Introduction: Distributed Approaches to Making Science Citizen science is a collective term for projects that engage both profes.sional scientists and non-specialists in the process of gathering, evaluating or computing scientific data. It has been around for well over a century, and its development can be linked to the professionalisation of science that began in the late nineteenth century, when science moved from the domain of the gentleman scientist to emerge as a distinct occupation (Miller-Rushing et al. 2012). There are two major developmental strands that have contributed to the pattern of citizen science projects we see today and which have greatly impacted on how projects are organised. In 1995 Alan Irwin used the term citizen science to refer to the action of citizens in addressing local environmental issues that relied on the collec.tion and analysis of scientific data (Irwin 1995). This type of citizen sci.ence has a bottom-up approach in which citizens ask research questions that are of direct relevance to themselves and their communities. The outcomes may be used to influence public policy or regulatory decisions. This type of citizen science research has also been known as community action research, or participatory action research (Eitzel et al. 2017). At about the same time, the term citizen science was also used by Rick Bonney and his colleagues at the Cornell Laboratory of Ornithology to © The Author(s) 2018 V. Curtis, Online Citizen Science and the Widening of Academia, Palgrave Studies in Alternative Education, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-77664-4_1 V.Curtis describe a growing number of projects that offered opportunities for non-specialists to become involved in authentic scientific research (Bonney et al. 2009). These types of projects are often top-down researcher-led initiatives, where professional scientists enlist the help of volunteers to either collect or evaluate data usually after a brief period of training. These efforts can result in scientific publications and the pro.duction of new knowledge. While this type of citizen science had its roots in ornithology it now encompasses a wide range of scientific disciplines at numerous institutions and organisations. These two distinct approaches to citizen science have been described as citizen-led co-created projects with local community groups on the one hand, and scientist-led partici.pation initiatives that are open to all sectors of society on the other (Roy et al. 2012). This book focuses on the latter. Scientist-led citizen science projects can have multiple aims and be applied in a variety of settings, both small and large-scale. They have benefits for both the scientists who set up projects, and for the individu.als who take part. A significant proportion of citizen science projects have enlisted volunteers to collect ecological, biological or environmental data. Data can be collected from a variety of geographical locations and over time in order to track phenological changes in wildlife, bird migration patterns, or more recently, biological or environmental markers of cli.mate change (Devictor et al. 2010). Given this geographic and temporal scale, such projects would be difficult, if not impossible, without the con.tributions of citizen scientists. While some have questioned the robust.ness of this data, the numbers of citizen-produced datasets are increasingly finding their way into credible scientific publications and are increasingly valued (Cooper et al. 2014). As well as fulfilling specific research objectives, citizen science can play a role in informal science learning and have the potential to increase sci.entific literacy among participants. Some scientists who set up projects have used them as public engagement tools in order to connect non.specialists with the process, as well as the outcomes, of science. Participants get an insight into the ‘black box’ of research and develop a greater under.standing of research protocols, the (sometimes repetitive) nature of data analysis, and the way in which new knowledge is disseminated though peer-reviewed journals. Perhaps one of the most important features of citizen science however, is its potential to produce lasting partnerships between scientists and non-specialists. The number and scope of citizen science projects has increased dra.matically over the past two decades – much of this is a direct result of developments in information and communication technology (ICT) and the Internet. These developments have made it easier to manage projects, recruit and communicate with volunteers, collate data, and disseminate research findings much more widely. It is now possible for prospective participants to get involved on a scale never seen before. In a response to the growing diversity of citizen science projects, some researchers have produced typologies to classify them. Several have focused on the degree of participation of the citizen scientist, for example Shirk et al. (2012) classify projects into 5 different types: contractual (where communities ask researchers to carry out a specific piece of research and report back with the results); contributory (designed by sci.entists giving ‘the public’ the opportunity to contribute data); collabora.tive (generally designed by scientists but where non-specialists help to refine and input into project design, analysis of data, or the dissemination of findings); co-created (the project is designed by scientists and non.specialists working together); and collegial (non-credentialed individuals design, implement and communicate their findings independently with.out involvement of professional researchers). Wiggins and Crowston (2015) have developed a typology that takes into consideration the highly variable approaches taken to different citizen science projects. They use several aspects of participation and project design such as funding, goals, participation activities, data quality processes, rewards, and social oppor.tunities to group projects. While these typologies can be helpful in understanding different approaches and styles of project, some have criticised them for focussing on just one aspect of participation, and perhaps conflating the tasks com.pleted by non-specialist participants with ‘empowerment’ (Kimura and Kinchy 2016). For example, even if a project is instigated by a commu.nity group in response to water pollution, it does not necessarily confer any power on them during confrontations with industries that may be the cause of local pollution. Conversely, non-specialist participants may not have had a hand in the development of a project, but can after time, V.Curtis form specialised project communities which may be empowered to col.laborate more closely with scientists, or begin asking their own research questions. The Impact of Digital and Communication Technologies on Citizen Science During the past two decades, developments in ICT have changed the way scientists work in a number of ways – most notably in the creation and integration of new knowledge. Digital technologies have influenced how scientists communicate with one another, and how they communi.cate with those outside the scientific community. For example, online sharing of data has facilitated scientific collaboration; and the rise of open notebooks, online repositories, and open-access journals has aided the dissemination of scientific results (Nielsen 2012; Scanlon 2013). Scientists are able to communicate more widely with interested non.specialists through websites, blogs, podcasts, and through social media. Some maintain that the development of Web 2.0 technologies which facilitate data sharing and the production of user-generated content, has begun to blur the boundary between professionals and an increasingly informed online public, and that this may have important consequences for the way scientific knowledge is generated (Stodden 2010; Blank and Reisdorf 2012). This rise in digital science combined with the expansion of new avenues of communication has been referred to as Open Science or Science 2.0 (Könneker and Lugger 2013; Burgelman et al. 2010). This phenomenon generally describes the trend towards an increased connec.tivity between scientists, and an increased capability for non-scientists to access science and the scientific community. The growth of open science has been accompanied by an increase in the accuracy and productivity of scientific instrumentation and data stor.age technologies. This new era of big data has led to what has become known as the data deluge, as scientists in some disciplines now acquire, store and mine huge volumes of digital data (Clavin 2013; Creighton 2010). For example, the Large Hadron Collider generates approximately 15 petabytes1 of data per year when in operation, and the Large Synoptic Survey Telescope which will be in operation in 2022, will produce 100 terabytes2 of data every night (McFedries 2011). Not only has the data deluge resulted in some important changes in the way scientific research is carried out, it has had an impact upon citizen science and in the type of opportunities that are now available (Wiggins 2010; Prestopnik and Crowston 2012). By the late 1990s, some scientists had realised that they would never be able to analyse all of this data on their own, and began to devise new ways to enlist the help of those outside of their academic institutions. This has led to what some have referred to as the crowdsourcing of science, where interested individuals help to analyse data produced by instru.ments that they would not normally have access to (Franzoni and Sauermann 2014; Nov et al. 2010). Scientists too now have access (via the Internet) to many thousands of potential participants in their proj.ects, and are able to accomplish more than was previously thought pos.sible (Wynn 2017). As a result of these developments, some citizen science projects are conducted entirely via the Internet and participants help to analyse large sets of data that have been provided by the project scientists. These proj.ects have collectively been referred to as citizen cyberscience (Grey 2009), virtual citizen science (Wiggins and Crowston 2012), or online citizen sci.ence (Holliman and Curtis 2015). Participation can take place within the comfort of one’s home, on the way to work, or wherever there is access to the Internet. Online citizen science projects have enabled many thou.sands of interested individuals to become involved in authentic scientific research from anywhere in the globe with internet connectivity. The Rise of Online Citizen Science One of the first online citizen science projects to emerge from this mix.ture of big data and the expansion of the Internet was SETI@home (Anderson 2004). In 1999, scientists from the University of California, Berkeley, asked members of the general public to volunteer their idle PC processing capacity to analyse data produced by radio telescopes searching for signs of extra-terrestrial intelligence. Hundreds of thousands of people V.Curtis have taken part in SETI@home,3 and its software platform, known as Berkeley Open Infrastructure for Network Computing (or BOINC for short), has been adapted for use in a number of other citizen science proj.ects involving the analysis of data packages by PCs and games units (Anderson 2004). These projects are more generally known as distributed computing, and they provided a foundation for projects that would even.tually allow participants to take a more active role in data analysis, proj.ects that are sometimes referred to as distributed thinking (Grey 2011; Haklay 2011). Shortly after the emergence of SETI@home, a project appeared in 2000 created by three NASA scientists that used volunteers (nicknamed clickworkers) for scientific tasks that required “human perception and common sense” (Kanefsky et al. 2001). The tasks did not require a scien.tific background and involved the identification and classification of cra.ters on Mars from images taken by NASA’s Viking Orbiter. This was a relatively short-lived project, but provided proof of concept for the suc.cessful involvement of non-specialists in this type of data analysis. In 1999 NASA launched the Stardust Mission, in which particles from Comet Wild 2 were collected in the spacecraft’s special aerogel collectors which were parachuted back down to Earth after the completion of the mission. In addition to comet particles, the aerogel collectors may have also captured inter-stellar star dust. In 2006 a project called Stardust@ home was set up in which participants searched images of the aerogel for signs of inter-stellar star dust (Westphal et al. 2014). Several thousands have taken part and a number of important discoveries have been made. Clickworkers and Stardust@home were the first distributed thinking projects and have been the inspiration for many of today’s largest online citizen science projects such as Galaxy Zoo, Planet Hunters and other projects on the Zooniverse platform where participants help to classify, annotate or transcribe scientific data (Keel 2010; Schawinski 2011). There are now well over one hundred online citizen science projects to choose from, both in distributed computing and in distributed thinking. More recently (since 2008) several projects have emerged in which scien.tific research problems have been re-packaged into online multi-player games (Curtis 2014). These citizen science games have attracted thousands of participants, and have, like other online citizen science projects, expe.rienced some research success. Indeed, a growing number of online citi.zen science projects have produced significant results that have been published in the academic literature (Cooper et al. 2010; Lintott et al. 2008; Schwamb et al. 2013). An analysis of the number of scientific arti.cles published based on citizen science has shown that online citizen sci.ence projects punch well above their weight and produce a significant proportion of publications (Follett and Strezov 2015). The success of some of these projects has also attracted a fair degree of attention from journalists, broadcasters and science communicators, which has helped to promote the projects to a wider audience. Who, How, and Why? Despite the growing number of projects, the many thousands of partici.pants, and the potential for knowledge production, there are some aspects of online citizen science projects that have not been fully investigated. For example, who do these projects appeal to – are they actually working to increase the accessibility of research and democratise science as some have asserted? Some projects have hundreds of thousands of registered participants. Do they all participate in the same way, or to the same extent? What motivates individuals to get involved, and can these moti.vations change over time? The motivations of the scientists who set up online citizen science projects, and the ways in which they can become involved with communities of online volunteers has yet to be explored in detail. A greater understanding of these aspects of participation is of rel.evance not only for those interested in understanding the phenomena of citizen science, online communities and informal science learning, but would also be very helpful for scientists considering setting up a project of their own. There is a small, but growing body of published work that has exam.ined various aspects of participation. Some of these studies have pro.duced important insights into some of the more popular projects (particularly projects on the Zooniverse platform). Most have explored motivation to participate, while a smaller number have considered opportunities for learning, the appeal of gamification, or the interaction V.Curtis of participants online. While the results of this work have enhanced our understanding of these projects greatly, there is a need for a more holistic approach that utilises multiple streams of data, and examines many aspects of a single project over time. Research that incorporates multiple sources of data can address a num.ber of important questions relating to patterns of participation. Such an approach has been taken in the new research that is presented in this book. Ethnographic observations, interviews and questionnaires were undertaken in order to explore three online citizen science projects in depth. This research considers who the participants are, their demo.graphic characteristics, their wider interests, and educational background; why they, and professional scientists are drawn to the projects and what sustains their commitment over time. It also considers how participants interact online, not only with each other, but with the professional scien.tists and developers who manage the projects. While this work looks in detail at three projects, it also examines findings from other studies and explores what others have observed. The ultimate aim of this work is to present a ‘meta-analysis’ of all the available data on online citizen science and to explore the role it plays in the generation of new scientific knowl.edge and in widening access to scientific research. Using Case Studies to Explore Online Citizen Science The case study is a focus on one thing: an individual; an organisation; an event; a project, which can be examined in depth and from many angles. Gillham (2000) describes a case study as a ‘unit of human activity’ which is best studied in context, and employed to gain a rich picture of real-life circumstances in order to obtain analytical insights. Case studies are by their nature, multi-method as multiple sources of evidence and lines of enquiry are employed to examine a case in great detail providing a ‘chain of evidence’ to address research questions. The types of evidence that can be used in a case study are wide-ranging and include interviews, personal accounts, diaries, group interviews, focus groups, archives, statistics, questionnaires, participant observation, and physical artefacts. Both quantitative and qualitative approaches to data collection and analysis can be utilised (Thomas 2011). Most methods of data collection and analysis have their strengths and weaknesses, and these may be slightly different for quantitative and quali.tative approaches. Quantitative research provides numerical data that is useful for statistical testing, visual representations, validating already con.structed theories, and, under certain conditions, generalising for a wider population. This type of research can be useful when exploring social phenomena (such as the patterns of participation in online citizen science projects) however, there are some limitations. For example, when con.structing a quantitative questionnaire for subjects of a study, the researcher may not be asking the right questions or may be constructing the ques.tions in such a way that information that is meaningful to the subjects is not captured. For example, if a study looking at motivation to participate in a project uses an online survey that presents respondents with a list of potential reasons for participation and asks them to select or rate which one(s) apply to them, other important (and unknown) motivations will not surface. The researcher may miss vital information by not asking the right questions or by asking them within too rigid a format. Qualitative research is useful for describing social phenomena and can be used to generate theories rather that test ones that have already been constructed. A hypothesis about a phenomenon is not generally required, and can emerge from the data as it is assembled and analysed. Data is often collected in a naturalistic setting, through interviews, conversa.tions, or observations directly within the environment of interest. It can provide an understanding or description of people’s personal viewpoint of a phenomenon and is based upon the participants’ own category of meaning. However, knowledge generated by qualitative research may be difficult to generalise to other settings or populations due to its specificity and often smaller sample sizes. For this case study research, both quanti.tative and qualitative methods were used – also known as a mixed meth.ods approach. A project (or case study) was chosen from each of the main types of online citizen science (or citizen cyberscience) as first described by Grey (2011). Grey divides online citizen science into distributed computing and distributed thinking. I decided to add citizen science games as a third category to my own typology as they provide another distinct format which may have a wider appeal, or at least appeal to a different audience than other types of citizen science project. As well as representing these three types of project, the cases also met the following important criteria: • they should not have been the focus of any other study at the time of its selection; • projects should ideally be at least a year old and relatively established; • the project should have an established online community; • project scientists and developers should be visible and interact to some degree with participants; • research objectives are made clear to the participants; Folding@home (http://folding.stanford.edu/) was chosen to repre.sent distributed computing projects, and Planet Hunters (https://www. planethunters.org/) one of the more popular Zooniverse projects, was chosen to represent distributed thinking. Foldit (www.fold.it), was selected from the small but growing number of citizen science games which have contributed to some significant scientific developments and publications in high-profile journals. One of the key features of this research is the incorporation of an eth.nographic approach to data collection. I became a participant in each project, regularly carrying out the project tasks and contributing where I could, to the online community of citizen scientists via forums and real-time discussions. Being a participant observer is a direct way of obtaining data by observing what people actually do. It has a number of advantages, namely, that it can provide access to the background culture and can enable a detailed description of behaviours and situations that may not otherwise be observed. However, exploring online groups also poses a new set of challenges, particularly relating to the concept of private vs public space. Indeed, much discussion about internet research has centred on this topic (Kozinets 2010). Project websites are in the public domain, and serve as the public interface and route of access to a project. These websites have online discussion forums where participants can interact and discuss issues relating to the project, or indeed, issues that are totally unrelated. It is not unknown for conversations to focus on more personal subject matters. While these discussions are easily viewed, one needs to consider whether participants would be happy for their discussions to be the sub.ject of research. One also needs to be mindful of the ‘terms and conditions’ for any given project. For example, do project scientists highlight the public nature of discussions and have some sort of acknowledgement or consent that participants need to agree to in order to participate? Some project managers (including those on the Zooniverse platform) highlight the open nature of participation and are quite specific about the potential consequences. Some projects (including Foldit) also have codes of con.duct that relate to online behaviour, and forum moderators can remove participants who do not adhere to the rules. The concept of privacy has been considered to varying degrees by managers of the projects selected for this study. There are user agreements and terms of ‘service and con.sent’, and participants are generally reminded that other people can see what is posted. However, the extent to which this is appreciated by par.ticipants is not always clear. There appears to be little research examining the views of those who are the subjects of online research. However, one study of several online internet chat rooms found that some participants (perhaps not surpris.ingly) were openly hostile to the presence of researchers (Hudson and Bruckman 2004). It was vital therefore that permission for my research was obtained from the project managers, and that the project participants were made aware of the study and my presence online. While most online forums and communities have rules or community guidelines, there is not as much advice for researchers working with online communities. I followed the guidelines put together by Bruckman (2002) when approach.ing the use (quoting and analysing) of material in the ‘public domain’, which are as follows: 1. You may freely quote or analyse online information without consent if: – it is officially, publicly archived – No password is required for archive access – No site policy prohibits it – The topic is not highly sensitive 2. For everything else not covered by 1, you typically need consent. (Bruckman 2002, p. 1) In addition to active communication with other participants through project forum and real-time internet chat, online exchanges were observed between other participants, and between participants and project manag.ers. Other related project content was explored including project team forums and project wikis that contained helpful information for partici.pants. These sources of online information (not always consulted in pre.vious research) supplemented the data generated through questionnaires and anonymised interviews, allowing a detailed picture of the projects to be assembled. Scope of the Book This chapter has described the emergence of online citizen science and highlighted its importance in the generation of new knowledge and its ability to involve thousands of participants in authentic scientific research. However, gaps in our understanding of these projects exist which can be addressed by adopting a case study approach that explores projects in detail. Chapter 2 describes each of the three projects selected as cases in detail (its history, set-up, participation tasks, opportunities for social interaction, and how it is generally ‘managed’) and is largely based on my own experiences as a participant-observer. Chapter 3 considers who is actually taking part in online citizen sci.ence. In addition to the data gathered from the three case studies, all published demographic data about participants from other online citizen science projects has been collated in attempt to explore whether these projects appeal to specific groups of people. Some have stated that citizen science helps to ‘democratise’ science, yet this may not actually be the case in light of the available data. Explanations for these observations are considered, as are the implications for accessibility and inclusivity. Chapter 4 is the first of two chapters which considers motivation to participate in online citizen science. It explores previous research and begins by considering the motivation to take part in more general forms of volunteering and in other types of commons-based peer production such as editing for Wikipedia and writing open source software. This chapter concludes with an examination of others’ work on online citizen science. In Chap. 5 we take a closer look at the motivations of both citizen scien.tists and the professional scientists and developers who set up and man.age Foldit, Folding@home and Planet Hunters. Data from surveys, interviews and participant-observation is considered in detail and also used to explore how motivation can change over time. While online citizen science projects have many thousands of registered participants, only a fraction are active and contribute on a regular basis. Chapter 6 considers varying levels of participation among active partici.pants and the emergence of different project roles. Findings from the case studies suggest that the more complex the project task, the greater the opportunities for role diversification. Theoretical models such as the reader-to-leader framework are used to explore what makes an individual move between different levels of contribution, and I will consider how these theoretical approaches may be adapted for online citizen science projects. These projects offer opportunities for both co-operation and collabora.tion between citizen scientists and professional scientists, and also between groups of highly engaged citizen scientists. In Chap. 7 I use the case studies to explore this in greater detail. In some instances, groups of participants form online communities of practice where newcomers learn from more experienced participants and develop a shared language and knowledge base. This chapter also reflects on some of the issues that can arise relating to participant interaction, and how wider communication issues can be considered in relation to project governance. Findings from the case studies have shown that many facets of partici.pation are inter-related and are mediated by the complexity of the project task. Chapter 8 considers these inter-relationships and, in light of the collated data, also considers what characteristics may make for a successful online citizen science project. While these projects have indeed opened up academic science for many active participants, more may be done to increase their inclusivity and accessibility. New developments in mobile technology, inquiry-based learning, and using online citizen science in a wider variety of settings (such as classrooms), may help to increase access across different sectors of the population. New approaches and technol.ogy may also help to bring projects to areas of the world that have a greater stake in the outcomes of the research. One note of caution: the number of online citizen science projects is growing every day. Over the course of this study, the Zooniverse alone has undergone tremendous growth and the number of projects on offer has almost trebled. The number of studies published that examine online citizen science has also expanded, so while every attempt has been made to include all the available data at the time of writing, it is likely that new material may well appear as the book goes into production. This work presents some insights into how digital tools may create opportunities for informal science learning and help to widen access to academic research. It is hoped that this book will be of relevance to those with an interest in citizen science generally – as well as those with a more specific interest in online or virtual projects. It is likely that many of the observations made in relation to Foldit, Folding@home and Planet Hunters will have some bearing on other types of citizen science project and to projects that involve interaction between specialists and non.specialists. My aim has been to make the work accessible both to natural scientists (who may manage, or are perhaps thinking of setting up, their own project), and to social scientists who are interested in a more detailed examination of the project communities. Ultimately, this work focuses on many of the social aspects of participation and employs mainly quali.tative methods. It is an exploration of the potential of online citizen sci.ence to foster virtual co-operation and collaboration, and in exceptional circumstances, the emergence of online communities of practice. Notes 1. A petabyte is one million gigabytes. 2. A terabyte is one thousand gigabytes. 3. This website provides daily statistics on the output and the number of participants in SETI@home and other distributed computing projects: http://www.teamocuk.co.uk/index.php?s=8f315d852c601368eb111539 388a9393. References Anderson, D. P. (2004). Public computing: Reconnecting people to science. In Conference on Shared Knowledge and the Web. Madrid, Spain. Blank, G., & Reisdorf, B. C. (2012). The participatory web. A user perspective on Web 2.0. Information, Communication & Society, 15(4), 537–554. Bonney, R., Cooper, C. B., Dickinson, J., Kelling, S., Phillips, T., Rosenburg, K. V., & Shirk, J. (2009). Citizen Science: A developing tool for expanding science knowledge and scientific literacy. Bioscience, 59(11), 977–984. Bruckman, A. (2002). Ethical guidelines for research online. http://documents. kenyon.edu/provost/irb_ethics_online.pdf. Burgelman, J. C., Osimo, D., & Bogdanowicz, M. (2010). Science 2.0 (change will happen...) First Monday, 15(7.) http://uncommonculture.org/ojs/index. php/fm/article/view/2961/2573. Clavin, W. (2013). Managing the Deluge of ‘Big Data’ from space. NASA Jet Propulsion Labratory, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/news/news.php?release=2013.299&cid=release_2013-299&utm_source=iContact&utm_medium= email&utm_campaign=NASAJPL&utm_content=release+201. Cooper, S., Khatib, F., Treuille, A., Barbero, J., Lee, J., Beenen, M., Leaver-Fay, A., Baker, D., Popovic, Z., & Players, F. (2010). Predicting protein structures with a multiplayer online game. Nature, 466(7307), 756–760. Cooper, C. B., Shirk, J., & Zuckerberg, B. (2014). The invisible prevalence of citizen science in global research: Migratory birds and climate change. PloS ONE, 9(9), e106508. Creighton, C. J. (2010). Inaugural Genomics Automation Congress and the coming deluge of sequencing data. Expert Review of Molecular Diagnostics, 10(7), 849–851. Curtis, V. (2014). Online citizen science games: Opportunities for the biological sciences. Applied & Translational Genomics, 3(4). Devictor, V., Whittaker, R. J., & Beltame, C. (2010). Beyond scarcity: Citizen science programmes as useful tools for conservation biogeography. Diversity and Distributions, 16, 354–362. Eitzel, M. V., Cappadonna, J. L., Santos-Lang, C., Duerr, R. E., Virapongse, A., West, S. E., Kyba, C. C. M., Bowser, A., Cooper, C. B., & Sforzi, A. (2017). Citizen science terminology matters: Exploring key terms. Citizen Science: Theory and Practice, 2(1). Follett, R., & Strezov, V. (2015). An analysis of citizen science based research: Usage and publication patterns. PLoS ONE, 10(11), e0143687. Franzoni, C., & Sauermann, H. (2014). Crowd science: The organization of scientific research in open collaborative projects. Research Policy, 43(1), 1–20. Gillham, B. (2000). Case study research methods. London: Continuum. Grey, F. (2009). Viewpoint: The age of citizen cyberscience. CERN Courier, http://cerncourier.com/cws/article/cern/38718. Grey, F. (2011, August 26). Citizen cyberscience: The new age of the amateur. CERN Courier, http://cerncourier.com/cws/article/cern/46877. Haklay, M. (2011, July 20). Classification of citizen science activities. Po Ve Sham blog post. Retrieved from http://povesham.wordpress.com/2011/07/20/ classification-of-citizen-science-activities/. Holliman, R., & Curtis, V. (2015). Online media. In R. Gunstone (Ed.), Encyclopedia of science education. Dordrecht: Springer Reference. Hudson, J. M., & Bruckman, A. (2004). “Go away”: Participant objections to being studied and the ethics of chatroom research. The Information Society, 20(2), 127–139. Irwin, A. (1995). Citizen science. A study of people, expertise and sustainable devel.opment. London: Routledge. Kanefsky, B., Barlow, N. G., & Gulick, V. C. (2001). Can distributed volunteers accomplish massive data analysis tasks? Paper read at 32nd Annual Lunar and Planetary Science Conference, March 12–16, 2001, Houston, Texas. Keel, W. (2010). Welcome to galaxy zoo. Astronomy, 38(9), 30–35. Kimura, A. H., & Kinchy, A. (2016). Citizen science: Probing the virtues and contexts of participatory research. Engaging Science, Technology, and Society, 2, 331–361. Könneker, C., & Lugger, B. (2013). Public Science 2.0—Back to the future. Science, 342(6154), 49–50. Kozinets, R. V. (2010). Netnography. Doing ethnographic research online. London: Sage. Lintott, C. J., Schawinski, K., Slosar, A., Land, K., Bamford, S., Thomas, D., Raddick, M. J., Nichol, R. C., Szalay, A. S., Andreescu, D., Murray, P., & Vandenberg, J. (2008). Galaxy Zoo: Morphologies derived from visual inspection of galaxies from the Sloan Digital Sky Survey. Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 389(3), 1179–1189. https://doi. org/10.1111/j.1365-2966.2008.13689.x. McFedries, P. (2011). The coming data deluge. IEEE SPECTRUM, 48(2 (Feb)), 19. http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.libezproxy.open.ac.uk/stamp/stamp. jsp?tp=&arnumber=569306. Miller-Rushing, A., Primack, R., & Bonney, R. (2012). The history of public participation in ecological research. Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment, 10(6), 285–290. Nielsen, M. (2012). Reinventing discovery. The new era of networked science. Princeton: Princeton University Press. Nov, O., Arazy, O., & Anderson, D. (2010). Crowdsourcing for science: Understanding and enhancing SciSourcing contribution. In ACM CSCW Workshop on the Changing Dynamics of Scientific Collaborations. Savannah. Prestopnik, N. R., & Crowston, K. (2012). Citizen science system assemblages: Understanding the technologies that support crowdsourced science. In iConference ‘12. Toronto: ACM. Roy, H. E., Pocock, M. J. O., Preston, C. D., Roy, D. B., Savage, J., Tweddle, J. C., & Robinson, L. D. (2012). Understanding citizen science and environ.mental monitoring. Final Report on behalf of UK-EOF. NERC Centre for Ecology & Hydrology and the Natural History Museum. Scanlon, E. (2013). Scholarship in the digital age: Open educational resources, publication and public engagement. British Journal of Educational Technology, 45(1), 12–23. Schawinski, K. (2011). Galaxy Zoo and the wisdom of crowds. Sky and Telescope, 122, 24–30. Schwamb, M. E., Orosz, J. A., Carter, J. A., Welsh, W. F., Fischer, D. A., Torres, G., A Howard, W., Crepp, J. R., Keel, W. C., & Lintott, C. J. (2013). Planet hunters: A transiting circumbinary planet in a quadruple star system. The Astrophysical Journal, 768(2), 127. Shirk, J. L., Ballard, H. L., Wilderman, C. C., Phillips, T., Wiggins, A., Jordan, R., McCallie, E., Minarchek, M., Lewenstein, B. V., & Krasny, M. E. (2012). Public participation in scientific research: A framework for deliberate design. Ecology and Society, 17(2), 29. Stodden, V. (2010). Open science: Policy implications for the evolving phenom.enon of user-led scientific innovation. Journal of Science Communication no., 9(1), A05. Thomas, G. (2011). How to do your case study. London: Sage. Westphal, A. J., Stroud, R. M., Bechtel, H. A., Brenker, F. E., Butterworth, A. L., Flynn, G. J., Frank, D. R., Gainsforth, Z., Hillier, J. K., & Postberg, F. (2014). Evidence for interstellar origin of seven dust particles collected by the Stardust spacecraft. Science, 345(6198), 786–791. Wiggins, A. (2010). Crowdsourcing science: Organizing virtual participation in knowledge production. Paper read at Proceedings of the 16th ACM international conference on Supporting group work, November 7–10, Sannibel Island, Fla. Wiggins, A., & Crowston, K. (2012). Describing Public Participation in Scientific Research. Paper Read at iConference, Toronto. Wiggins, A., & Crowston, K. (2015). Surveying the citizen science landscape. First Monday, 20(1). Wynn, J. (2017). Citizen Science in the Digital Age: Rhetoric, science, and public engagement. Tuscaloosa: The University of Alabama Press. 2 Exploring Online Citizen Science in Depth: A Tale of Three Projects Researchers interested in the phenomenon of online citizen science have published a small, but growing body of work examining various aspects of participation, especially in relation to motivation to take part. These have produced a number of important insights into some of the more well-known projects and platforms. However, there is little research that examines multiple dimensions of individual projects in detail, or consid.ers how aspects of participation may be inter-related. One of the main aims of this book is to address this gap in our understanding by present.ing detailed information about a small number of ‘representative’ online citizen science projects, and to ask: who participates; why do they partici.pate; and how do they participate? By using projects as case studies, and adopting a more qualitative methodology, some light has been shone on the inter-relationships between these facets of participation. In this chapter I will outline the projects that were selected for case studies. I will describe the project tasks in detail, opportunities for inter.action with other participants (and with the professional scientists and developers who manage the projects), and the potential for co-operation and collaboration. Perhaps most importantly, I will compare the num.bers of registered participants with the number of active participants and © The Author(s) 2018 V. Curtis, Online Citizen Science and the Widening of Academia, Palgrave Studies in Alternative Education, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-77664-4_2 illustrate how the number of individuals who make a committed and regular contribution to these projects is, in fact, relatively small. Most of what is presented here was gleaned through being a participant-observer in each of the projects, with some of the more detailed demographic information derived from online surveys of participants. Why These Projects? Online citizen science projects have arisen in many different scientific disciplines with some now in the arts and humanities. The defining fea.ture of these projects is that the data has already been collected or gener.ated by professional scientists, and it is the analytical tasks that are assigned to the citizen scientist. The type of tasks that are available vary, but all are self-contained within the virtual environment of the project interface. In distributed computing projects, project software is downloaded and the participant’s computer runs the analysis often without much input from an individual participant. Participants can run simulations, or search for patterns in large volumes of data with computer algorithms. Some have described involvement in distributed computing as largely passive, although the involvement of some sub-groups of participants is actually a lot more involved than previous work would suggest (this will be discussed later in the chapter). In other types of projects, known as distributed thinking projects (Grey 2011) participants take an increasingly active role in classifying or anno.tating data (which may be in image form), or in transcribing data (e.g from historical records). The projects on the Zooniverse platform (www. zooniverse.org) provide an excellent example of the range of tasks found in distributed thinking projects. Participants classify and mark images, analyse data plots, count images, and transcribe written historical docu.ments. Some have argued that these projects require a greater cognitive input from the participant than distributed computing, and require some training or practice before a participant can work on actual data. During the last ten years we have seen the emergence of online citizen science projects re-packaged as online multiplayer games. These have also been referred to as scientific discovery games, and games with a purpose. They often have highly stylised user interfaces and some seem quite far removed from the actual scientific analysis taking place. For example, the game Phylo (http://phylo.cs.mcgill.ca/) explores different phylogenetic relationships between different animal species, but looks more like the game Tetris. This isn’t always the case, and the game Foldit (www.fold.it) which explores the structure of protein molecules, has players directly manipulate a computerised model of a real protein under investigation by biochemists. While citizen science games can be considered distrib.uted thinking projects, they have some characteristics that set them apart (e.g. a competitive element, interactive interface, and possibly an appeal to a different demographic of ‘gamers’) and so warrant a more detailed examination (Holliman and Curtis 2015). Thus, a project from each of the three ‘types’ was selected for an in-depth study: Folding@home (distributed computing), Planet Hunters (one of the Zooniverse projects and a distributed thinking project), and Foldit (an online citizen science game). Most of the in-depth participant-observations were made between 2012 and 2015, although the projects have been continually monitored until the beginning of 2018 and any significant changes have been noted. The custodians of the three projects were willing to grant me wider access to their wider project community, and were keen to learn more about their respective project communities. Folding@home (http://folding.stanford.edu/) Distributed computing (DC) projects have been around for over two decades and were the first online citizen science projects. Their contribu.tion to scientific research has been highly significant. The number of publications based on the results generated by Folding@home eclipses that of any other individual online citizen science project (160 publica.tions in March 2018). Some who research online citizen science believe that DC projects do not offer participants much of an opportunity to contribute apart from simply downloading and running the project soft.ware, and that involvement is minimal or passive. While this may be the case for some participants, my observations of Folding@home have shown that this is clearly not the case for all participants and that a variety of roles are available for those with wider interests in the science and / or the project software. There are also sub-communities of participants who bring their expertise and knowledge of computer hardware to distributed computing projects. It is perhaps these participants more than any, who have helped to make them so incredibly productive and who have sus.tained distributed computing projects for over two decades. Folding@home was one of the first distributed computing projects in the biological sciences, and is based at the Chemistry Department at Stanford University in California. It was developed in October 2000 by Professor of Chemistry, Vijay Pande, and his group continues to manage the project and process most of the results (Sansom 2011). In addition to running on PCs, Folding@home can run on some game systems and graphics processors. The use of games and graphics processing units (GPUs) greatly increases the processing capacity of the project, and Folding@home is one of the fastest computing systems in the world (Lane et al. 2013). The main research aim of Folding@home is to understand the process of protein folding. Proteins are the workhorses of biology and are the primary chemical for almost all cellular processes. Before proteins can carry out their biochemical functions, they assemble themselves or ‘fold’ into a final three-dimensional structure that is specific to each individual protein. This involves their transformation from a ‘string’ of amino acid molecules, to a complex structure of helices and sheets held together by different types of chemical bonds. The process of protein folding is not fully understood despite being fundamental to nearly all biological func.tions and if a protein ‘misfolds’, there can be serious consequences for an organism. For example, in humans, Alzheimer’s disease, Creutzfeldt Jakob Disease, Huntington’s disease, motor neurone disease, and some cancers all occur as a direct result of protein misfolding. Within the cell, protein folding occurs incredibly quickly – within milliseconds or microseconds. Folding@home enables this process to be slowed down considerably so that folding is simulated at a rate thousands to millions of times slower than it occurs naturally. This allows scientists to examine protein folding more closely. Insights gained from simula.tions have also led to new experimental approaches and the combination of simulation and experiment has greatly advanced knowledge of protein folding over the past 10 years (Lane et al. 2013). Currently, Folding@home is investigating protein misfolding in rela.tion to Alzheimer’s disease (and how it relates to the formation of protein aggregates in the brain), Huntington’s disease, and cancer (specifically misfolding in a molecule known as P53, a tumour suppressor gene). Another key area of research has been using computational methods to design new drugs, especially for Alzheimer’s. The Pande Group, as well as other collaborating groups, use Folding@home to investigate diabetes, Parkinson’s disease, brittle bone disease, and some of the underlying mechanisms associated with the development of viral diseases. The number of scientific publications based directly on data produced by Folding@ home continues to grow.1 If a Folding@home participant wishes to find out more about the sci.ence relating to protein folding, there are a number of resources on the website including background information about the science, FAQs about the project, interviews with the scientists, links to all of the result.ing publications (although not necessarily full access), links to external resources, and a blog written by Vijay Pande. Downloading the Folding@home software is relatively straightfor.ward, and once installed, participants can view progress of the current ‘work unit’, and learn more about the protein being analysed in a web browser. For each work unit completed, points are awarded. A partici.pant can select what disease they would like their processing power to be used for from a pull-down menu and see the simulation as a screensaver (Fig. 2.1). Participants have the option to join a team and pool the points they earn through running the simulations with other team members. Once an individual (or team) registers with Folding@home, then a pro.file page is set automatically set up (which can be viewed by anyone) and it displays the number of points earned, the date the last work unit was completed, rank, team affiliation and the number of ‘clients’ (or indi.vidual processing units) a participant (or team) runs. The project leader board displays the top 100 individual contributors, and the top 100 per.forming teams. The awarding of points to teams and individuals introduces an element of competition. This is one way that distributed computing projects can make participation more enjoyable and interactive for participants (Darch and Carusi 2010). Folding@home teams often try to recruit members through the Folding@home project forum and participants are free to join any team that is registered with the project. Statistics relating to accom.plishments are very important to some participants (Bohannon 2005; Larson et al. 2009) and there are a number of third-party websites that maintain up-to-date and more detailed figures for the various distributed computing projects that are currently active – including Folding@home. A small number of Folding@home participants have taken a more active role in the project by helping to moderate the forum discussions. Other participants have contributed to the project by helping to translate pages of the website into other languages, and by helping to keep the FAQs up to date. Participants who have suitable computing experience can help make improvements to the software, and their help is enlisted from time to time. These volunteers are referred to as the Beta Testers and they work closely with the professional project developers on new releases of the project software, or fixing bugs. Their numbers vary with the requirements of the project, and requests for help are usually made via the project forum. Like many online citizen science projects, Folding@home offers oppor.tunities for interaction with other participants. The Folding@home forum is the main area where project participants can interact, either with other participants, or occasionally, with members of the project team. If a participant wants to post content on the Folding@home forum and interact with other participants then they must register separately, although these are public pages and anyone can read the content. Discussions on the forum are often highly technical with many of the threads focussing on the project software and how different types of hard.ware can be used to efficiently run the project simulations. There is also a ‘general discussion’ area in the forum which contains threads related to the science behind Folding@home, including links to media articles and coverage of the project. There is also an ‘anything goes’ section, although this also focuses on technical aspects of the project, and discussions relat.ing to software and hardware. There are approximately 3–4 identifiable forum moderators as well as a number of participants who contribute regularly. Much of the discus.sion contains advice (both from the moderators and from other partici.pants) relating to installing Folding@home, software, and hardware issues. Participants and moderators appear to be willing to help others get the most out of their technical involvement in the project. Discussions about the science are also similarly well-informed, with some forum par.ticipants showing an interest in the details of the science and in other related areas of research. Links to new and related research are often shared by participants. The forum is the only dedicated area on the proj.ect website in which there is interaction, and this interaction is asynchro.nous, and there is no facility for live, synchronous chat. As a new participant, I was puzzled by the project forum and the highly technical nature of its content. I expected (as in other projects) to find information about the science behind the research, information about the research group, and perhaps links to publications or other outcomes. I wasn’t quite sure how this technical information related to my own participation, and I found myself wondering who it was for. Project forums on other distributed computing projects appeared to have simi.larly technical discussion threads. Further observation of external Folding@home team pages, and discussions with individuals employed as software and hardware engineers, alerted me to the existence of a group of computer hobbyists who focus on maximising processing power by building and customising their own computers. ‘Overclockers’ and Hardware Enthusiasts As success on the leader board requires that a very high numbers of com.puter or graphics processing units are donated, distributed computing attracts a particular group of participants known as overclockers. They are computer hardware enthusiasts who build custom machines with the aim of maximising their processing power. Occasionally, individuals compete to see whose machine is able to produce the most processing power, and one way to measure performance is through participation in distributed computing projects. For example, the ‘Chimp Challenge’ (last held in 2013) was an annual competition between teams on Folding@home to see who could process the most work units over a given time period. Distributed computing projects thus provide a benchmarking tool for the overclocking community. Little has been written about overclockers and their contribution, but one estimate (although now quite dated) states that they may contribute over half of the processing power to all distributed computing projects (Bohannon 2005). However, this may well be an underestimation given the scale of the difference between the contribution of an overclocker, and a more ‘passive’ contributor (such as myself) running the programme on a single (unaltered) laptop. As well as my own observations and discussions, results from the online survey carried out among Folding@home participants helped in my identification and exploration of this important sub-group of partici.pants. Many respondents belong to teams (some associated with hard.ware manufacturers) and a significant proportion spoke about wanting to make the most of their computer processing power when asked why they take part in Folding@home. I had no previous knowledge of overclocking. Interestingly, other research on distributed computing projects does not specifically mention this community of enthusiasts. While overclocking is by no means unknown amongst general computer and other technology-based enthusiasts, there is little mention of them in the academic literature relating to citizen science or online communities. I managed to find just one short article about overclocking published in 2005 (Bohannon 2005). However, by exploring a little further, it soon became apparent that there are many online communities and forums dedicated to ‘over-clocking’, and that this is a sizeable and significant group of hobbyists. Within the overclocking community, there are sub-communities that organise themselves according to other hobbies and interests, or align with some of the major manufacturers of computer hardware (at one time, Folding@home participants qualified for discounts from one major manufacturer). The same is true of the overclocking groups who take part in Folding@home. For example, one of the biggest teams in Folding@ home is Brony@home. This (adult, mainly male) group are fans of the cartoon series ‘My Little Pony: Friendship is Magic’. They have an online community where overclocking tips are shared, and where others are encouraged to devote their computer power to Folding@home in order to contribute to scientific research.2 Other Folding@home teams have more obvious affiliations such as Team Carl Sagan, the Czech National Team, or Team University of Toronto. Many have their own online com.munities that are completely separate from the Folding@home project site. Within these groups, individuals share their expert knowledge of hard.ware, as well as engage in friendly competition. Computer overclocking is a serious hobby and many invest thousands of dollars on the associated kit and electricity costs. Many overclocked ‘rigs’ incorporate multiple processing components and require sophisticated cooling systems often using liquid nitrogen. Neon lighting is often added for visual appeal.3 Distributed computing projects are widely discussed on overclocker and enthusiasts’ forums, and they serve as important vehicles for increasing publicity about a particular project and for recruiting new participants. It is likely that overclockers make a significant contribution to Folding@home, although it is difficult to ascertain with any accuracy what percentage of project work units they complete. Many of the largest teams are affiliated with manufacturers of computer hardware (e.g. EVGA, a manufacturer of hardware and graphics processors) so it is highly probable that members of those teams have an interest in overclocking. Other teams have a reference to overclocking in their name, for example, ‘Overclockers Australia’ and ‘Overclockers Club’. There are approximately 100,000 ‘clients’ (computer processing units or CPUs) running Folding@home, although this is dynamic. While the number of CPUs can be accurately ascertained, it is difficult to know with any certainty how many individuals this translates to as some par.ticipants run the software on several machines, or use machines that run multiple processing units or ‘clients’. For example, one of the top ranking Folding@home contributors has 34 active clients according to their pro.file page. The project managers estimate that there are approximately 100,000 individuals participating in Folding@home, although it is likely that this is an overestimate. A third-party source, which collects user sta.tistics from the Folding@home website every three hours, Kakaostats,4 gives a much lower figure and estimates the number of individual partici.pants at just over 27,000. As well as knowing the actual number of individuals taking part, I was interested in understanding what proportion of them fell into the two distinct groups of participants: overclockers, and more the passive par.ticipants who simply download and run the project software on an unal.tered machine. The fact that there are uncertainties relating to the total number of project participants does complicate things however. As the Folding@home website only lists the top 100 teams, and the top 100 individual participants, I used data from Kakaostats to try and estimate what proportion of Folding@home participants were overclock.ing. The Kakaostats site lists all of the top performing teams and all active individual participants. It also provides the number of points generated per team and per individual participant per day over the past seven days, and it was this data that helped to identify the proportions of the two different types of contributor. Overclockers can generate many thousands of points per day, while someone who contributes solely on an unaltered lap-top or PC would take many weeks, months, or perhaps years, to generate the same amount of points. Based on a close examination of the Kakaostats data, and by counting participants who produce large numbers of points per day, I estimate that there are approximately 10,000 individuals participating in Folding@home who are overclockers. However, the discrepancy regarding the total number of participants remains, so the proportion of Folding@ home participants could be anything from 10 to 30 percent. Regardless of the true figure, overclockers do the majority of the processing work and it is likely that Folding@home would not be as successful (in terms of number of publications) if it was not for their contribution. Planet Hunters (https://www.planethunters.org) Planet Hunters is a distributed thinking project that belongs to the Zooniverse platform of online citizen science projects (www.zooniverse. org). Launched in 2007, the first project in the Zooniverse was Galaxy Zoo which enlisted the help of volunteers to classify thousands of images of galaxies taken by the Sloan Digital Sky Survey. A task that would other.wise have taken one or two researchers many years was achieved in a mat.ter of weeks (Lintott et al. 2008). The founders of the Zooniverse were inspired by another citizen science project, Stardust@home,5 which had a similar glut of data to analyse and decided to enlist the help of non.specialists with analysis. Over the past decade, the Zooniverse has hosted over 100 different projects from a range of disciplines (including the arts and humanities). Currently, 90 are listed on the homepage (March 2018). Many of the projects have involved classification or annotation tasks although there a few have involved the transcription of historic docu.ments (e.g. Old Weather and Shakespeare’s World). The aim of the Zooniverse is to enlist the help of citizen scientists in authentic scientific research – particularly in areas that are data intensive. In return for these efforts, projects managers try to educate and engage their many partici.pants. Over one hundred publications in scientific journals have resulted from the efforts of participants (or ‘Zooites’ as some refer to themselves). In addition to these publications, a number of ‘meta studies’ exploring the other aspects of Zooniverse projects (such as scope for informal learn.ing, motivation to participate, and patterns of participation) have been published.6 The contribution of citizen scientists (regularly referred to as ‘collaborators’ by the Zooniverse team) is gratefully acknowledged, with a link to a list of all project participants. This is marked contrast to Folding@home, which does not appear to openly acknowledge the work of Folding@home participants in the same way. In a smaller number of Zooniverse publications (including those produced by the Planet Hunters project), citizen scientists have been named co-authors. Prospective participants in the Zooniverse projects create a username at the time of registering which can be used for any Zooniverse project. No personal details (with the exception of email address) are collected at any stage. Many Zooniverse participants contribute to several projects at any one time and contributions are stored on an individuals’ Zooniverse profile, as are contributions to project discussions. Profiles can also be used to send a private message to other participants, list recent updates from numerous social media streams, and contain links to the blog posts of the projects they take part in. It should be noted that an individual does not have to register to participate in the Zooniverse, so involvement can be very informal and ad hoc. Planet Hunters is an astronomy-based project managed by scientists from Yale University and Oxford University. It enlists the help of citizen scientists to search for planets outside of the solar system orbiting distant stars (known as exoplanets) and uses data collected by the NASA Kepler Space observatory (Schwamb 2014). Planet Hunters was launched in December 2010 and quickly became one of the most popular projects on the Zooniverse. This was something of a surprise to the organisers as the task involves the examination and tagging of graphical data, rather than looking at and classifying colour astronomical images. Throughout the first phase of its mission, the space telescope monitored approximately 160,000 stars, continually recording their brightness and taking a mea.surement every half an hour. Project scientists were looking for small periodic reductions in the brightness of stars in the Kepler field. These small fluctuations in brightness can be the result of a planet crossing in front of it, and are known as transits. Participants in Planet Hunters are given graphic data, referred to as a light curve, for any given star in the Kepler field. These contain data points that represent the brightness of a star, and show variations in the star’s brightness over a given period (Fig. 2.2). The participant is asked to classify the general shape of this light curve from a given list of options. After they have made this initial classification of the star, their next (and most important) task is to look for evidence of planetary transits which manifest themselves as recorded dips in the brightness of a star as a planet passes in front. These appear on the light graph as points below the main body of the light curve. The task is relatively straightforward, although it does require some attention to detail. This example provided in the proj.ect tutorial, illustrates a clear example of a planetary transit. However, most of the light curves given to participants to classify are not as clear and contain considerably more ‘noise’ than the example below. In order to improve the accuracy of the classifications, each light curve is looked at by at least 5–10 different participants. Classifications of light curves are carried out by individual citizen sci.entists. There are no teams on Planet Hunters, nor are there leader boards or points awarded for participation. At the end of each classification, the participant is asked if they would like to discuss the curve. If the object is of interest, or if the participant is uncertain as to whether there is any evidence of a transit, they can highlight the object in the ‘Talk’ area of the project. This is where objects of interest can be highlighted and discussed with other participants, and where project scientists can look for any.thing put of the ordinary. In addition to human analysis of the Kepler data, an algorithm was developed by NASA scientists that also analyses light curves. This algo.rithm has led to the discovery of hundreds of planets, some of which have been confirmed by Planet Hunters participants. The work of citizen sci.entists on Planet Hunters complements this automated analysis, and human observation has highlighted a number of unique systems that have been overlooked by computers (Schwamb et al. 2013). The data from the Kepler mission has been publicly archived, and is openly avail.able to anyone for analysis. By the beginning of 2018 there had been twelve publications in peer-reviewed journals based upon the work of citizen scientists involved in Planet Hunters. This includes the discovery of two new extrasolar planets by project participants – PH 1b and PH 2b and a system known as PH 3 with several orbiting planets. Individual participants who have been involved in the discovery of the new planets have appeared as co-authors in subsequent publications (Lintott et al. 2013; Schmitt et al. 2014; Schwamb et al. 2013; Wang et al. 2013). Over 160,000 individuals have registered with Planet Hunters and it has been one of the more popular projects on the Zooniverse. Several years after its launch, it accounted for approximately a quarter of all the activity on the site (although there were fewer projects on the platform to compete with). However, of the many thousands of registered partici.pants, the number that contributes regularly is quite small. One of the project organisers provided a snapshot of participant activity from May 2013 (in retrospect, this is most likely the peak of the Planet Hunters project). Of the 160,000 or so registered participants, about 115,000 (71.5%), had not marked any transits on the light curves, that is, they had just completed (or just arrived at) the first task of identifying the shape of the light curve and gone no further. Of the 46,000 people who had completed the main task and looked for transits, nearly half (21,620) had analysed fewer than 10 light curves in total. Of the remainder, 4500 participants had analysed over 200 light curves each, thus carrying out the majority of the classification tasks. Even within this group of actively contributing participants, there are an even smaller number of individuals who have done a disproportionate amount of the work. Forty individuals have classified over 10 000 light curves each, with one individual classifying over 100,000 light curves. This pattern of participation has been documented in relation to other online citizen science projects (Ponciano el al. 2014; Tinati et al. 2014) and in other types of online activity such as contributions to Wikipedia. It is sometimes to referred to as a power-law distribution, or the Pareto Principle, in which small numbers of individuals carry out the bulk of the work in a given group or community. In order to build up a more complete picture of participation in Planet Hunters, particularly the core group of contributors, I observed and monitored the appearance of participant usernames on the discussion boards as well as comments made on project blogs. Registered players taking part in any Zooniverse project discussion are listed at the bottom of the screen when in the projects’ discussion area, so this also enables key contributors to be identified. By making these observations over a period of several months, I estimated that approximately 300 individuals were actively participating in Planet Hunters. Of this group, a much smaller number (10–20) were more closely involved in the project and made many more classifications than other more casual participants. These are individuals who contributed at least four times per week, participated regularly in the online discussions and made use of opportunities to com.municate with project scientists (e.g. via the project blog). A few of these participants were also analysing the raw Kepler data, and took a greater interest in the underlying science relating to exoplanets. Participants have a number of channels through which to interact with each other, and with the project scientists. There are three separate fea.tures on the project website that allow this interaction: the ‘Talk’ func.tion; the discussion boards; and the project blog. The Talk function is used by participants to draw attention to light curves of interest. After analysing a light curve, the participant is asked whether they would like to talk about it. If they do, then they can post a message (which has a limit of 140 characters) which then appears with the image of the light curve in the Talk section under a list entitled ‘Recent Objects’. Other participants may look at these objects and comment, perhaps checking to see if they see any evidence of a transit, or if the object shows some kind of unexpected feature. Images can be grouped into ‘collections’ and project scientists can monitor these for any patterns of interest. In addition to the Talk feature, participants also have the option to communicate with each other on the discussion boards (these do not impose a character limit). The discussion boards are divided into ‘Help’, ‘The Science’ and ‘Chat’ and provide areas where participants can learn more about the project, and can discuss items of interest in more detail than in the Talk function. Both citizen scientists and members of the project team use these areas and they are moderated by three different citizen scientist volunteers. Discussions are generally related to the proj.ect and the associated science, even in the ‘chat’ section. One study inves.tigating how Planet Hunter participants learn about the project task, found that the Talk function was used much more widely than the dis.cussion boards (Mugar et al. 2014). One or two members of the scientific team communicate with the project participants through the Planet Hunters blog which contains news and updates about the project, background information about the science, and details relating to the publication of research or presenta.tions at academic meetings. Citizen scientist volunteers can comment on these posts. Occasionally there are guest blogs from postgraduate stu.dents, and moderators of the discussion boards. Zooniverse projects, including Planet Hunters have an established presence on social media sites with thousands of followers on Twitter and Facebook. Many of my observations of Planet hunters were made between 2012 and 2014 and this appears to have been a time of peak activity, especially in the weeks and months following the promotion of the project during the 2012 series of the popular BBC astronomy series Stargazing Live. Over 100,000 visits were recorded after this programme was broadcast in January 2012.7 In May 2013, the Kepler spacecraft suffered a malfunc.tion which brought its extended mission to a close, although data that had already been collected was analysed by Planet Hunters participants throughout 2016. Since late 2014 Planet Hunters has not been very active and recent observations reveal a less active community of online citizen scientists. Discussion threads have fewer posts and there are longer time periods between posts. Only two articles have appeared on the project blog over the last 12 months, and in the Talk area there are often only one or two other registered participants present. Modifications to the data has per.mitted the analysis to continue with the ‘K2 Phase’ of the Kepler Mission and the data collected from the re-booted K2 Mission now forms the basis of yet another Zooniverse project – K2 Exoplanet Explorers. The waxing and waning of Planet Hunters may shed some light on the natural life-cycle of these projects. Some Zooniverse projects have smaller datasets and so finish after all the data has been analysed (e.g. Spacewarps, the Andromeda Project). Some have various releases, and successive data.sets that are made available to participants. Once one set of data is anal-ysed, participants have to wait until more data becomes available (e.g. Snapshot Serengeti). Another question that arises in relation to the Zooniverse is: does the increasing number of projects available on the Zooniverse platform mean that some projects are ultimately ‘cannibal.ised’ as participants move from a regular project to a new one? Data col.lected through the surveys and interviews suggests that the most active participants contribute to several Zooniverse projects at any one time. According to an update from one of the Zooniverse team, projects that are now on the platform are run in a more autonomous fashion with less input from the central team. Groups of scientists can more easily set up their own project that follows the Zooniverse template, and this has allowed the rapid increase in projects. The features that permit interac.tion between participants follow the same ‘Talk’ format which is easier for project teams to manage, yet this may not promote the same level of interaction as observed in the forums of the earlier projects such as GalaxyZoo. The number and range of projects has increased, yet the social dimension has been reduced somewhat and fewer relationships develop between professional scientists and citizen scientists. Sustainability is an important consideration for those who manage online citizen science projects, and it is directly influenced by what data is available and when, the type of tasks available to participants, and whether there are opportunities for learning and engagement. How these factors are inter-related will be considered in greater detail in Chap. 7. Foldit (www.fold.it) Foldit is one of the first citizen science projects to use an online multi-player game format to address a challenging scientific problem. It har.nesses the collective problem-solving abilities of players in order to create accurate protein structure models (Cooper 2011). Foldit was developed at the University of Washington in Seattle by a group led by Professor David Baker at the Department of Biochemistry in collabora.tion with researchers at the Centre for Game Science (also at the University of Washington) led by Professor Zoran Popovich and Dr Seth Cooper. Its’ origins lie in a distributed computing project managed by the same project team called Rosetta@home which is also concerned with protein structure. Foldit was developed in response to a request by Rosetta@home participants for a project that was more interactive. It was co-developed with a small group of players and publicly launched in May 2008. Foldit has resulted in a number of significant publications in high pro.file science journals where teams of Foldit players have been listed among the co-authors (Eiben et al. 2012; Khatib et al. 2011a, b). Consequentially, there have been numerous news and magazine articles praising Foldit for its innovative approach to ‘crowdsourcing science’ and for opening up the scientific research process to members of the public (Hand 2010; McGonigal 2011). Much can be learned about a protein’s function once its structure is understood, and this knowledge can be applied to the study of common diseases, or to the development of innovative biological molecules or therapeutics. During play, Foldit players use their three-dimensional problem solving skills and online manipulation tools based on computer algorithms (some generated by Rosetta@home), to try and produce accu.rate models of protein structures that are yet unknown. Protein structures that are confirmed to be the closest to their ‘natural’ configuration (that is one that requires the least amount of energy) are awarded a greater number of points. Players can play individually, or within a team, and compete against one another for points. Despite the obvious competitive aspect of the game, players also work together collaboratively to solve the protein puzzles. Foldit teams are generally closed. Often a new player only needs to ask to join a team, but in other cases, new players with promise are identified through their activity on global chat, and are invited to join a team where they are helped and ‘developed’ by more proficient team members. Foldit is a complex game and it can be very difficult to learn. There are a series of tutorial or ‘intro’ puzzles (36 in total) that guide the player through the various game tools available and they are based on proteins where the structure is already known (Fig. 2.3). There is no requirement that the participant complete all of these puz.zles before they can work on more complicated puzzles where the protein structure is unknown – puzzles known as ‘science puzzles’. Once confi.dent in the use of the puzzle tools, a new player can then advance on to the science puzzles (Fig. 2.4). As well as completing the science puzzles for points. Players can also finish puzzles started by other players. Players who do this are known as ‘evolvers’ and are usually among the more skilled group of participants. During gameplay, players can communicate with each other via a syn.chronous chat window. There is a ‘global’ chat area open to all players. This is moderated by other players, and there is a code of conduct. New players often find invaluable help here from more experienced players as they get started. In the global chat area, experienced players who perhaps don’t belong to a team can collaborate on the more difficult puzzles. In addition to the global chat area, there are team chat areas which are acces.sible only to members of the same team. Collaboration and cooperation also takes place here, and new team members can receive help. Within both global and team chat areas, other topics (unrelated to Foldit) are also discussed, and online friendships between players can develop over the months (or years) of regular playing. The synchronous chat feature is quite rare in online citizen science projects (it’s also a feature in another citizen science game called EteRNA). Having immediate feedback and help aids collaboration, and helps new players learn about the complex tools of Foldit. It also plays an important role in establishing a sense of community. In addition to the synchronous internet chat available during game-play, players can interact with each other and with members of the Foldit project team on the (asynchronous) forum. Many of the discussion threads relate to making the best use of game tools, the science of protein folding, information about competitions, new versions of the game soft.ware, community rules, technical issues, and general discussions insti.gated by players about the game (e.g. how can we help new players? How can we improve the game?). The majority of discussions on the Foldit forum relate to the game and seldom stray into other topics. Many threads are quite technical in nature and there are some players who have clearly learned much about protein folding and confidently use associ.ated scientific terms and technical language. The website contains a blog that is written by the project scientists and developers, and players can comment on these posts which gives them the opportunity to communicate directly (albeit asynchronously) with scientists and developers. However, players communicate directly and in real-time with the project team via ‘scientists’ chat’s or ‘developers’ chats’ which are held approximately every two or three months. Any player can participate. Discussions are usually of a technical nature relating to updates to the game, or the development of new puzzles and the tran.scripts of these chats are posted on the website. Players can also report problems and make technical suggestions to the project team in the ‘Feedback’ area of the website. Through these discussions, the more com.mitted players can have an influence on the project. Foldit has developed and evolved over time, and players have played a key role in instigating many important changes to the game. For exam.ple, in 2010, a small group of players developed a way of automating individual ‘moves’ in the science puzzles by coding sequences of actions using the scripting language Lua. These sequences of moves have become known as ‘recipes’ and can help to speed up the playing process, and enable the puzzles to be worked on without the player having to actually be there. Recipes have been shared among the Foldit community (although some are not shared beyond an individual team), and certain players have become known for their skill at writing them (Cooper et al. 2011). The use of recipes has significantly changed the way many partici.pants play Foldit, although some choose not to use them and remain committed to ‘hand-folding’. In response to this, the designers of Foldit have created puzzles especially for participants who prefer this more ‘tra.ditional’ way of playing. Each registered Foldit player has an individual profile page on the proj.ect website which can be viewed publicly. The profile page keeps a record of all their activity on the game, such as when they last played, which tutorial puzzles they have completed, which science puzzles they have completed, points awarded, and other achievements including recipes they have developed, or whether they have won any challenges. Players can edit their profile page to include more personal information about where they live, what they do, other hobbies and interests, images and avatars. Each team also has its’ own profile page listing achievements and the usernames of those within the team. Public profile pages can reveal much about the participants in a project and are an invaluable source of information for the participant-observer. Perhaps most importantly, they can illustrate how regularly registered participants actually contribute to a project and the length of time they are active and playing. Foldit has hundreds of thousands of registered players, although many are undoubtedly duplicate or abandoned accounts. Media coverage of Foldit has often focussed on the contribu.tion of ‘thousands’ to the solving of a complex scientific research problem and Foldit has been singled out as an important example of the power of crowdsourced science. However, an examination of random selections of player profiles revealed that most of them recorded no playing activity whatsoever. A smaller number showed that perhaps one or two ‘intro’ puzzles had been attempted. A closer inspection of the Foldit forums (forum pages from the begin.ning of Foldit in 2007 are readily accessible), leader boards, in-game dis.cussions, archived transcripts of chats with the developers suggested that the number of active players was indeed (and not surprisingly), much smaller. It is estimated that the active playing community is somewhere in the region of 200–300 (a figure later corroborated by Foldit develop.ers). Of this community, a smaller number of players have formed a highly dedicated core group who take on a variety of roles within the project including forum moderators, team leaders, teachers, recipe scripters, and ‘evolvers’. Like Planet Hunters and Folding@home, the number of active Foldit Participants is a relatively small percentage of the total of those registered to participate. This pattern of contribution has been found in other online citizen science projects and other contributory online communi.ties such as Wikipedia. Initial observations and participation in Foldit has also demonstrated that a variety of distinct roles can emerge within a project – particularly one with a relatively complicated (and difficult) project task like Foldit. This diversification of roles within online citizen science projects will be discussed in further detail in Chap. 6. It is interesting how many external media reports of projects such as Foldit talk of ‘thousands of gamer’s or ‘ordinary’ citizens working together to solve research problems, when the reality is quite different. Clearly, ‘registered’ and ‘active’ participants need to be differentiated for those interested in a scholarly examination of online citizen science. Tens of thousands of registered Foldit players have not even completed the first tutorial puzzle, and in the Zooniverse, some registered players may have only completed a single classification. Conversely, the contribution of overclockers and hardware enthusiasts has been relatively under reported and unremarked upon. While this work does not seek to undermine the innovative, and in many cases, highly successful approach to addressing scientific research problems, it is important to explore exactly how this work happens. Who is taking part? Why do they take part? And what are the opportunities for collaboration and generation of new knowledge in which non-specialists play an important role? Notes 1. All publications resulting from Folding@home are listed on their website http://folding.stanford.edu/papers-results/. 2. Brony@home has produced a number of short films about their involve.ment in Folding@home, including ones for recruitment: https://www. youtube.com/watch?v=Rd-fWo4fsg8. 3. Photos of overclocked ‘rigs’ are shown off in this discussion thread from the EVGA community of overclockers. https://forums.evga.com/Show.off-your-FoldingCrunching-Rigs-m1905683.aspx. 4. Kakaostats http://www.kakaostats.net/ regularly records user statistics for all Folding@home participants, and all Folding@home teams that have been active in the previous 30 days. 5. Stardust@home participants help to look for traces of interstellar stardust within aerogel filters collected as part of a NASA Stardust Discovery Mission http://stardustathome.ssl.berkeley.edu/. 6. A list of Zooniverse-related publications can be found here: https://www. zooniverse.org/about/publications. 7. The BBC’s Stargazing Live programme (http://www.bbc.co.uk/pro.grammes/b019h4g8) has brought much attention to the Zooniverse, and has promoted an astronomy project during each of its series including Planet Four, Exoplanet Explorers, and Pulsar Hunters. References Bohannon, J. (2005). Grassroots supercomputing. Science, 308, 810–813. Cooper, S. (2011). A framework for scientific discovery through video games. Doctor of Philosophy, University of Washington. Cooper, S., Khatib, F., Makedon, I., Lu, H., Barbero, J., Baker, D., . . . Players, F. (2011). Analysis of social gameplay macros in the Foldit cookbook. Paper pre.sented at the Foundations of Digital Games, Bordeaux. Darch, P., & Carusi, A. (2010). Retaining volunteers in volunteer computing projects. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 368(1926), 4177–4192. Eiben, C. B., Siegel, J. B., Bale, J. B., Cooper, S., Khatib, F., Shen, B. W., . . . Baker, D. (2012). Increased diels-alderase activity through backbone remod.elling guided by Foldit players. Nature Biotechnology, 30(2), 190–192. Grey, F. (2011, August 26). Citizen cyberscience: The new age of the amateur. CERN Courier. Retrieved from http://cerncourier.com/cws/article/ cern/46877. Hand, E. (2010). People Power. Nature, 466(5 August 2010), 685–687. Holliman, R., & Curtis, V. (2015). Online media. In R. Gunstone (Ed.), Encyclopedia of science education. Dordrecht: Springer Reference. Khatib, F., Cooper, S., Tyka, M. D., Kefan, X., Makedon, I., Popovic, Z., . . . Players, F. (2011a). Algorithm discovery by protein folding game players. Proceedings of the National Academy of Science – Early Edition, 108(47). Retrieved from PNAS Early Edition website: www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/ pnas.1115898108. Khatib, F., DiMaio, F., Group, F. V. C., Cooper, S., Kaznierczyk, M., . . . Baker, D. (2011b). Crystal structure of a monomeric retroviral protease solved by protein folding game players. Nature Structural & Molecular Biology, 18, 1175–1177. Lane, T. J., Shukla, D., Beauchamp, K. A., & Pande, V. S. (2013). To millisec.onds and beyond: Challenges in the simulation of protein folding. Current Opinion in Structural Biology, 23(1), 58–65. Larson, S. M., Snow, C. D., Shirts, M., & Pande, V. S. (2009). Folding@home and Genome@home: Using distributed computing to tackle previously intractable problems in computational biology. ArXiV, 0901.0866. Lintott, C. J., Schawinski, K., Slosar, A., Land, K., Bamford, S., Thomas, D., . . . Vandenberg, J. (2008). Galaxy Zoo: Morphologies derived from visual inspection of galaxies from the Sloan Digital Sky Survey. [Article]. Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 389(3), 1179–1189. doi: https://doi. org/10.1111/j.1365-2966.2008.13689.x Lintott, C. J., Schwamb, M. E., Barclay, T., Sharzer, C., Fischer, D. A., Brewer, J., . . . Batalha, N. (2013). Planet Hunters: New Kepler planet candidates from analysis of quarter 2. The Astronomical Journal, 145(6), 151. McGonigal, J. (2011). Be a gamer, save the world. Wall Street Journal. Retrieved from www.wsj.com website: http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052 748704590704576092460302990884.html. Mugar, G., Osterland, C., DeVries Hassman, K., Jackson, C. B., & Crowston, K. (2014 ). Planet hunters and seafloor explorer: Legitimate peripheral par.ticipation through social proxies in online citizen science. 2014 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work, Baltimore. Ponciano, L., Brasileiro, F., Simpson, R., & Smith, A. (2014). Volunteers’ engagement in human computation for astronomy projects. Computing in Science & Engineering, 16(6), 52–59. Sansom, C. (2011). The power of many. Nature Biotechnology, 29(3), 201–203. Schmitt, J. R., Wang, J., Fischer, D. A., Jek, K. J., Moriarty, J. C., Boyajian, T. S., . . . Smith, A. M. (2014). Planet hunters. VI. An independent charac.terization of KOI-351 and several long period planet candidates from the Kepler archival data. The Astronomical Journal, 148(2), 28. Schwamb, M. (2014, March). How you can find an exoplanet. Sky and Telescope, 18–23. Schwamb, M. E., Orosz, J. A., Carter, J. A., Welsh, W. F., Fischer, D. A., Torres, G., . . . Lintott, C. J. (2013). Planet hunters: A transiting circumbinary planet in a quadruple star system. The Astrophysical Journal, 768(2), 127. Tinati, R., Simperl, E., Luczak-Rösch, M., Van Kleek, M., & Shadbolt, N. (2014). Collective intelligence in citizen science–A study of performers and talk.ers. Paper presented at the Collective Intelligence, Boston. Wang, J., Fischer, D. A., Barclay, T., Boyajian, T. S., Crepp, J. R., Schwamb, M. E., . . . Parrish, M. (2013). Planet hunters. V. A confirmed Jupiter-size planet in the habitable zone and 42 planet candidates from the Kepler archive data. arXiv preprint arXiv:1301.0644. 3 Who Takes Part in Online Citizen Science? We know that the number of active participants in an online citizen sci.ence project can be a relatively small proportion of all the registered par.ticipants, but one of the key questions is do they appeal to certain individuals or groups? Is there a ‘typical’ participant? Citizen science has on occasion been written about within the context of open science, and some have suggested that citizen science has enabled a move towards a greater ‘democratisation’ of science – suggesting that scientific research is accessible to anyone who wishes to take part, even if they lack the formal educational qualifications (Könneker and Lugger 2013; Nielsen 2012; Stodden 2010). Examining the demographic characteristics and wider interests of participants may help us to see whether this is actually the case. What We Currently Know About Participants Not all research on online citizen science has explored this issue or col.lected demographic information about participants. A review of the pre.vious work to date has shown that 13 studies have collected data that describes participants in some way. This is summarised in Table 3.1. © The Author(s) 2018 V. Curtis, Online Citizen Science and the Widening of Academia, Palgrave Studies in Alternative Education, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-77664-4_3 Table 3.1 Demographic information collected from online citizen science studies Project and sample Author/year size Demographic details of sample Holohan and Various distributed Garg (2005) computing projects including SETI@ home and GIMPS (Great Internet Mersenne Prime Search) n=323 SETI@home SETI@home (2006) distributed computing project, n=142,000 Krebs (2010) malariaControl.net distributed computing project, n ranges from 693 to 1097 Estrada et al.  Docking@home  (2013)  distributed  computing project  n=739  World A collection of Community Grid  distributed  (2013)  computing projects  and part of IBM  corporate  responsibility  programme,  n=15,627  Reed et al. (2013) Zooniverse projects, n=199 Raddick et al. Galaxy Zoo, n= (2013) 10,708 98.4% were male, and most aged between 26 and 49. 70% based in USA and Canada, and 24% based in Europe. 92.74% are male, and 61% were aged 20–39. 56% of participants were based in Europe and 33% in North America. Most were aged between 20 and 50. 87.8% were male (n=693). Most of the survey participants were IT professionals. 80% were male, and most males were aged between 31 and 35. Female respondents were aged mainly between 46 and 55. Small representation of ‘ethnic minorities’. 90% of sample was male, and most have a “technical knowledge base”. Most aged between 25 and 44. 36% work in information technology. 67.3% were male, with a mean age of 40.7. Most based in USA or UK. Many had a college degree (119 participants provided this info on education). 82% are male, and the mean age is 43.2 with no clear age trends. Most respondents are from North America and Europe. Over half have at least a bachelor’s degree. (continued) Who Takes Part in Online Citizen Science? Table 3.1 (continued) Author/year  Project and sample size  Demographic details of sample  Gugliucci et al. (2014)  Cosmoquest, n=334  Mostly male (79%), 48% were aged 45–64, 58% have at least a BA, nearly half work in a STEM-related field, 75% had studied science  beyond secondary school, 59% live in the US, 28% amateur  astronomers, half regularly engage in science-related activities  Lieberoth et al. (2014)  Quantum Moves, two sub-groups explored  Participants from one subset (n=2511) were mainly from Denmark, Germany, US, UK, Sweden  Another subset of players (n=674) had 585 men and 89 women.  Masters et al. (2016)  Numerous Zooniverse projects (VOLCROWE Project) n=1921 Galaxy Zoo, Planet Hunters, Penguin Watch, Seafloor  56% male, 39% unemployed, 66% urban, 87% white, 66% had BA or higher (44% of these were in science),43% had a named religion  Kloetzer et al. (2016)  Explorer, Snapshot Serengeti BOINC (Berkeley Open Infrastructure for Networked Computing) Alliance  93% respondents male, 95% aged under 55, two thirds aged 26–45, 23% work in computer science – wide diversity of occupations for remainder, variation n level of education, self-assessment of  Francophone (distributed computing) Survey n=147  science skills – 7.1% professional, 32.3% ‘I am doing well’, 44.5% ‘I can get by’. Self-assessment of interest in computing: 37.4% ‘I am a professional’, 42.6% ‘I am doing well’.  Tinati et al. (2017)  Eyewire survey n=1505  62% male (age data unclear)  (continued) Project and sample Author/year size Demographic details of sample Barr et al. (2017) HiggsHunters (a Zooniverse project) n=322 65% male, range of ages in sample, 74% have at least an undergraduate degree, over half had postgraduate qualification. Well represented occupations included teachers, engineers, consultants, developers and researchers. 80% had previously participated in a citizen science project. The first thing that one notices about this data is that the majority of study participants are male. In some cases, overwhelmingly so. It is espe.cially marked among the distributed computing projects and in Quantum Moves – a game based on quantum physics. The study by Masters et al. (2016) examining five different Zooniverse projects has a more equitable representation and just over half of the combined study participants were male. A range of ages are recorded across the projects, with no obvious trends, although some of the distributed computing projects tend to have slightly younger participants than some of the distributed thinking projects such as Cosmoquest. Another striking feature of this data is that study partici.pants tend to be well educated. The studies exploring Zooniverse projects report that their samples of participants are well educated with the major.ity having at least a Bachelor’s degree. The report on Cosmoquest looked at the level of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) education, and found that most had studied a STEM subject beyond secondary school. The survey of the World Community Grid found that many participants had a ‘technical knowledge base’ referring to the fact that many study participants were employed in IT-related professions. This was also observed in MalariaControl.Net and in the BOINC Alliance Français – both distributed computing projects. Two of the studies noted the ethnicity of their participants with Estrada et al. (2013) finding a very small representation of ethnic minorities (American Hispanic), and Masters et al. (2016) observing that 87% of Who Takes Part in Online Citizen Science? their study group were white (and also predominantly urban). The study of Masters et al. also considered religious beliefs among Zooniverse participants to explore whether those with a religious background were more likely to take part in this type of voluntary work (a correlation with religious belief and other types of volunteering has been observed). They found that 43% of their study cohort described themselves as having a religious affiliation. Approximately 39% of the sample was unemployed. However, this may well be due to the fact that some are retired. Informal discussions with those involved in other Zooniverse projects such as Old Weather (where Naval weather observations are transcribed by volun.teers), and published data from conservation-based citizen science sug.gests that some projects attract a large percentage of older, retired participants (Bradford and Israel 2004). While these observations are interesting, it must be noted that the participants in the above studies may not be wholly representative of all who participate in online citizen science and this must be considered in their interpretation (although some of the studies do have very large sam.ple sizes). However, the consistencies are revealing, particularly the pre.dominance of well-educated male participants. Demographic data from the case studies on Folding, Folding@home and Planet Hunters also reveal some similar patterns (outlined below), and other data relating to profession, formal STEM education, and wider interest in science helps to build up a more complete picture of the project participants. New Data from the Case Studies Foldit Players A total of 37 players responded to my online survey. While this is a small number, it actually represents 12–18% of the active playing community (see Chap. 2 for a more detailed discussion of how the number of active participants was ascertained). The majority of respondents were male (78%) and aged over 40 (68%). Most were based in the US and European countries. This sample of Foldit players is very well educated. Seventeen respondents (46%) had an undergraduate degree, and nine (24%) had a postgraduate degree. A few (6 individuals) had only the equivalent of a high school education, although 2 of this sub-group of respondents were still attending high school. The majority of those that had a university education (both undergraduate and postgraduate) were qualified in a STEM subject, although this was more likely to be in an IT or engineering discipline. Only a couple of players had a background in the biological sciences. This is reflected in the data collected about profession. Over a third of respondents worked in Information technology (IT), two were econo.mists, and a variety of professions were found among the rest. Only two had jobs that were linked to the biological sciences – one described them.selves as a biologist, while the other was a conservationist. In addition to playing Foldit, I was interested in whether participants regularly played any other computer games. A number of print and online media articles written about Foldit make much of the fact that ‘gamers’ are helping to solve scientific problems, and the Foldit team appear to highlight this packaging of Foldit as a game when promoting it to external audiences (Burke 2012; Cossins 2013). Twenty-two of the respondents (59%) stated that they did not play any other games apart from Foldit. Although many stated that they enjoyed doing puzzles such as crosswords and Sudoku. I was also curious to know if respondents had a wider interest in sci.ence and I asked them if they had taken part in other science-related activities during the previous year. The majority of respondents (35) had. These science-related activities are listed in Table 3.2. Participants were also asked if they had taken part in other citizen sci.ence projects during the past year. Nearly half of respondents (18) had. Most of this group had taken part in distributed computing and Zooniverse projects, with a smaller number trying out other citizen sci.ence games such as EteRNA and Phylo. Folding@home Participants This survey had the greatest number of respondents (407) which may be due to the fact that Folding@home has the largest community of active participants out of all three projects. The higher response may also be due to the fact that the link to my survey was independently shared on a number of Folding@home team web sites and other discussion forums (particularly overclocker forums) by some of the survey respondents. However, as outlined in Chap. 2, the actual number of participants in Folding@home is difficult to ascertain, and various estimates range from 27,000 to 100,000. Therefore, this sample is still a relatively small pro.portion of the total number of participants, and represents approximately 1.5%, if the upper estimate is taken, or 4% if there are indeed only 27,000 participants. Number of participants  Science-related activity  taking part  Watching TV with science content  29  Reading popular science books  22  Listening to science-based radio programmes  18  Visiting science centres/museums  15  Attending public lectures  11  Stargazing/amateur astronomy  8  Visiting open days at local universities  5  Reading science magazines  3  Reading online science material  2  Going to science festivals  2  Informal science course  2  Assembling science kits/toys  1  The majority of respondents (63%, 255 individuals) were under the age of 40 (unlike Foldit). Most were based in the US, Canada and Europe. Only 11 respondents were from developing countries. However, one of the most striking results from this survey was the very small proportion of female respondents. Less than 2% were women (seven individuals in total). Of the studies that have looked at distributed computing projects, all have found that the majority of respondents to their surveys (usually over 90%) have been male (Anderson 2004; Estrada et al. 2013; Krebs 2010; World Community Grid 2013). The disproportionate representation of men may be due to the appeal of distributed computing projects to hardware enthusiasts, and those with an interest (professional or amateur) in computing. While signifi.cant efforts have been made to improve the representation of women in IT-related industries, and in their uptake of computer science at school and university, women continue to be under-represented in this field (Camp 2012; Deloitte 2016). This may have a knock-on effect regarding the numbers of women who are computer hardware enthusiasts and who take part in distributed computing projects, or even have an awareness of such projects. Of the seven women who responded to my survey, two are currently studying IT and electrical engineering, and two are IT profes.sionals who describe their computing skills as advanced. Just over half of respondents had a university degree, while just over a quarter were educated up to high school or UK equivalent. However, almost 20% of respondents were currently students, which may explain the younger age profile of this group of participants. Of those who had a university degree, the vast majority (82%) had studied a STEM subject. The majority of respondents were in skilled professions. A significant proportion (37%, 150 individuals) stated that they worked in an IT-related profession. Business professionals and other types of engineers were well represented, and about 5% were in scientific or medical professions. Most respondents had taken part in a variety of science related activi.ties in the previous year (Table 3.3). Watching scientific television pro-grammes and reading online science material were the most popular. Many read science magazines, and nearly a quarter had taken part in an amateur astronomy event during the past year. Table 3.3 Other science-related activities undertaken during the last 12 months – Folding@home Science-related activity  Number of participants taking part  Watching TV with science content  290  Looking at online science material  269  Reading popular science magazines  160  Visiting science centres/museums  153  Reading popular science books  122  Amateur astronomy  106  Listening to scientific radio programmes  104  Attending public lectures  63  Attending open days at local universities  30  Attending science festivals  24  Who Takes Part in Online Citizen Science? Just over half of respondents (212) had not participated in any other citizen science projects, and Folding@home was their first experience. Although 179 respondents had taken part in other distributed comput.ing projects with many mentioning SETI@home, the World Community Grid and Einstein@home (which is a search for evidence of pulsars). Participation in other types of citizen science project was limited with a very small number (12) trying Zooniverse projects or Foldit. Planet Hunters Participants In total, 118 individuals responded to the online survey. Approximately 160 000 individuals are registered with Planet Hunters. However, the number of participants actively contributing to the project during the period when data was collected (2013–14) was estimated to be in the region of 300. The majority of respondents to the survey were male (74%), with a relatively equitable distribution among the different age groups. Respondents were well educated with almost three quarters having either an undergraduate or postgraduate degree. Interestingly, 75% of these qualifications were in a STEM subject. Most participants were from developed countries. Nearly half were based in Europe, over a third were from the US and Canada, and the remainder were scattered around the globe including Australia, New Zealand, South Africa and India. As in Foldit and Folding@home, there was a relatively high representation of IT professionals, business professionals and students. Eleven respondents work in ‘the sciences’ including the following professions: lab technician, meteorologist, physicist, chemist, scientific researcher, science writer, and geologist. Yet again, one of the most notable features of the demographic data is the predominance of male respondents. According to one of the Zooniverse scientists I interviewed, a skew towards male participants is found in a number of Zooniverse projects particularly astronomy ones. Astronomy is a subject that has been male dominated both in the professional and amateur arena (Cesarsky and Walker 2010). According to a report published for the Royal Astronomical Society, only 28% of UK university lecturers in astronomy and 7% of astronomy professors are women (McWhinnie 2011). The largest UK amateur astronomy associa.tion, The British Astronomical Society, estimates that about 19% of their members are women (Massey 2015). Given these figures, it is perhaps unsurprising to find more male than female participants in an astronomy-based citizen science project such as Planet Hunters. Almost this entire group had taken part in other science-related activ.ity during the past year. Table 3.4 illustrates the types of activities and the numbers of respondents reporting taking part in them during the past year. Not surprisingly, amateur astronomy was popular. In addition to their participation in Planet Hunters, 68% of survey respondents participated in other citizen science projects – many are other projects in the Zooniverse such as Galaxy Zoo, Old Weather, Moon Zoo and Planet 4. It is very common for participants in the Zooniverse to move between projects, and try new ones as they become available. Registered Zooniverse participants receive direct emails from the Zooniverse team letting them know when new projects are launched, or if a new dataset has been added to a favourite project. A smaller propor.tion (about 20%) had participated in distributed computing projects (mainly SETI@home – the search for extra-terrestrial intelligence). In summary, the results from the three online surveys suggest that these projects may share a number of demographic features – both with each other, and with other online citizen science projects. Table 3.4 Other science-related activities undertaken during the last 12 months – Planet Hunters Number of participants taking  Science-related activity  part  Looking a science material online  105  Watching TV with science content  103  Amateur astronomy  81  Reading popular science books  75  Visiting science centres/museums  69  Reading popular science magazines  69  Listening to science-based radio  56  programmes  Attending public lectures  38  Attending science festivals  17  Attending university open days  15  Who Takes Part in Online Citizen Science? • Respondents were predominantly male (there were 45 females from a total of 562 survey respondents, that is only 8%). • Respondents are mainly from developed countries (549 respondents, 98%). • Most of the respondents are well educated with the majority having at least an undergraduate degree (335 respondents, 60%). A high pro.portion of those who are graduates have qualified in a STEM subject (81% of graduates, 272 respondents). Ninety-seven respondents were students. • Almost one third of respondents work in IT-related professions (177 respondents, 31.5%). • Most of the respondents are engaged with science in other ways. Practically all (with the exception of a few) had taken part in other science-related activities in the previous year, and just over half (293, 52%) had taken part in other citizen science projects. Based on these observations, and the observations of others, online citizen science projects may particularly appeal to certain groups of indi.viduals – at least those who are active and regular contributors. A ‘typical’ active participant is likely to be male, well-educated with some formal STEM qualification. They are interested and engaged in science, seeking out science-related reading matter or internet content, and possibly tak.ing part in other citizen science projects. They are comfortable with com.puters and ICT generally, and may well work with computer technology for a living. It should be emphasised that those who participate less regu.larly, and are perhaps less likely to respond (or see) requests for participa.tion in surveys and other studies, may not fit this profile. The Appeal of Online Citizen Science These observations have important implications when one considers the wider appeal of online citizen science, sustainability of projects, and ulti.mately, how much these projects open up and ‘democratise’ science. One of the first questions this data raises is why are more men actively participating in online citizen science? Some research has shown that men are more likely to engage with science than women and are more likely to take an interest in new technology and scientific developments (ComRes and RCUK 2017; Kennedy and Funk 2015). There may also be a disparity in what type of science appeals more to women than men, and some areas of science (particularly the physical sciences) attract less women than men professionally (Bian et al. 2017). Previous research has also shown that public engagement events in astronomy also attract more men than women (Curtis 2013; Entradas et al. 2013). It is perhaps unsurprising to find more male participants in an astronomy-based citi.zen science project such as Planet Hunters. However, both Foldit and Folding@home deal with research in bio.logical science, which tends to have a better representation of women both in formal education and professionally (albeit at relatively junior levels compared with men) (Bowden 2012; Howard 2013). A recent UK study also showed that women tended to be interested in areas of science that were related to health and medicine (IpsosMORI 2016). Both Foldit and Folding@home address the underlying mechanisms associated with some serious diseases such as Alzheimer’s, cancer and influenza, so the low proportion of women among the survey respondents may be the result of other factors. Some previous research has found that gender has an effect on internet use, and several studies have found that men tend to spend more time than women on the Internet (Divide 2017; Kende 2016). Not only do men tend to spend more time on the Internet, but they are also more likely to use it for entertainment purposes and to play games (Helsper 2010). These observations could also help to explain the higher propor.tion of men participating in online citizen science (certainly in my three case studies) and increase the likelihood that men will learn about these projects via internet articles or searches. The format of these projects is of importance, and the fact that Foldit is a game and Folding@home is a distributed computing project could influence their appeal to women. While the number of women who play computer games has grown rapidly over the past decade, male gamers still outnumber female games by approximately 3:2 (ESA 2016). Women also tend to play different types of games than men. For example, they do not play as many online multi-player games and they tend to play more Who Takes Part in Online Citizen Science? games on mobile devices (Green 2012). One previous study also consid.ered the amount of leisure time women had compared with men. It was observed that due to less leisure time available, fewer women played com.puter games, and those that did, played them for much shorter bursts of time (Winn and Heeter 2009). A game like Foldit requires much time and dedication in order to become an accomplished participant. These patterns and observations may help to explain the smaller proportion of female Foldit players, and suggests that the game packaging of some citi.zen science projects may not necessarily appeal to a diverse audience. In distributed computing projects, all previously published research has shown that the majority of participants are male, and this includes studies with very large sample sizes (SETI@home 2006; World Community Grid 2013; Estrada et al. 2013). The appeal of distributed computing projects to hardware enthusiasts and overclockers, and the lack of women I observed among this community, may explain the extremely low proportion of women in the Folding@home sample. However, as previously noted, there is very little detailed information about this community of hobbyists. I had some interaction with over-clockers via their forums and asked about this observation. While there was general recognition of a lack of female representation, there was uncertainty as to why this pattern of participation was observed. Furthermore, most of the Folding@home survey respondents reported hearing about the project through websites and forums relating to com.puter hardware and overclocking. As a result, a smaller proportion of women may be hearing about the project because they just aren’t part of this community. It is important to note that it has been harder to reach more ‘passive’ participants in Folding@home (those who just download and run the programme) and an investigation into these participants could possibly reveal greater female representation. Indeed, this could be the case for all of the projects investigated. Women may well be participating, but per.haps not as actively, or perhaps in different ways. Feedback from one of the Zooniverse custodians suggests that female participants were more active in moderating forums, and more of the moderators on Zooniverse projects are women. Another notable feature of these three groups of respondents (as well as some of the participants in other Zooniverse projects and projects such as Cosmoquest) was how well educated they were and 60% of those who responded to my survey had a university education. Of the remaining 40% nearly half were currently studying. Previous research on attitudes towards science has shown that those with a greater level of education are more interested and engaged with science (ComRes and RCUK 2017; Ipsos-MORI 2014; Kennedy and Funk 2015). Such individuals, particu.larly those with a formal qualification in a STEM subject, may consume more science-related content and come into contact with sites and publi.cations which promote and discuss online citizen science projects. Almost half of respondents (48%) had formal qualifications in STEM subjects although there were very few (36) respondents who were employed as scientists or were in medicine. Individuals with some formal education in science may be bringing some expertise to the projects, either through their knowledge of the related science (e.g. two of the Planet Hunters participants who I interviewed had degrees in astron.omy), or knowledge of the research process (e.g. the importance of rigor.ous data analysis, the publication of results, collaboration etc.). Out of the three projects I investigated, Foldit is the most difficult to master and requires complex problem-solving skills. Interestingly, Foldit had a greater percentage of graduates (65%), and a quarter of respondents were edu.cated to masters or PhD level. Feedback from some of those who took part in the Planet Hunters interviews also highlighted a desire to be (re)connected with science, and that their involvement in the project offered them the opportunity to get involved in an area that was once of great interest or importance to them. Those with a formal qualification in a STEM subject have already dem.onstrated an interest in science and technology, so online citizen science games may naturally appeal to these interests. Practically all of the respondents from the three projects demonstrate a wider interest in science and report taking part in science-related activi.ties such as reading popular science books, visiting science centres, and looking at science-related websites (only three respondents reported not taking part in any science-based activities in the previous year). More than half had taken part in other citizen science projects (although this Who Takes Part in Online Citizen Science? may have been skewed by the tendency of ‘Zooites’ to participate in mul.tiple Zooniverse projects). This high level of engagement with science may be indicative of the appeal of online citizen projects to those who have been described previously as ‘fans of science’ (Priest 2009) or ‘confi.dent engagers’ (Ipsos-MORI 2011). According to the research from Ipsos-Mori, such individuals are usually better educated, more affluent than other sections of the population, and have more positive attitudes towards science and scientific developments. More recent opinion research con.ducted in the UK calls this group ‘establishment advocates’. They have a high level of engagement with research and support for public funding, and also exhibit more trust in establishment figures – including scientists (ComRes and RCUK 2017). Another notable observation among survey respondents was the high proportion (nearly a third) of those in IT-related professions. While this could be related to the presence of a large number of hardware enthusi.asts and overclockers in the Folding@home sample, it was also observed in Planet Hunters and Foldit. This suggests that online citizen science projects may be more appealing to those who are confident in using com.puters, or who are more technically proficient. This is certainly the case for those whose involvement is related to an interest in overclocking and computer hardware. As well as knowledge relating to computer hard.ware, others have brought technical skills which have been hugely benefi.cial to these projects. This has been demonstrated by Foldit players involved in the advent of ‘recipes’ (the coding of game moves using the Lua coding language), and by the contribution of the Beta Team in Folding@home (an ad hoc group of participants with software skills who help to test or de-bug the project code). In addition to this appeal to those with existing technical skills, online citizen science will be more appealing to those who are comfortable using the Internet and being part of an online and inter-connected world. The Oxford Internet Survey (2013) refers to confident internet users as ‘e-mersives’, and defines them as individuals who are comfortable and naturally at home in the online world and use the Internet for entertain.ment purposes, to meet people and to make their lives easier (Dutton and Blank 2013). Given the interest in other online citizen science projects, consumption of online science content, and participation in online forums and communities, it is likely that this term accurately describes the active participants in Foldit, Folding@home and Planet Hunters who were part of my research. Are These Projects for Me? The lack of diversity observed among participants in online citizen sci.ence, has also been observed in relation to audiences at public engage.ment events, and physical spaces associated with informal science learning such as museums and science centres (Dawson 2014, 2017, 2018). In the case of physical spaces there may be tangible impediments that prevent some people from attending or participating such as location, or cost of entry. With regard to online spaces, participants must have ready access to the Internet, and in some parts of the world this simply isn’t an option yet. This may help to explain the observation that many partici.pants in online citizen science are located in developed countries, and may also explain the observation by Masters et al. (2016), that Zooniverse participants are more likely to be in urban areas, rather than rural ones. However, another explanation may be found in a phenomenon known as ‘threshold fear’ (Gurian 2005). This has been examined in relation to attendance at museums, art galleries and other public cultural institu.tions. It has been defined as the constraints people feel that prevent them from participating in activities that may be targeted at them. The concept of threshold fear concerns itself primarily with the effect of socio-cultural factors such as gender, ethnicity, age, class background, and personal history. All of these elements influence who takes part in these activities, and what kind of experience they have if they do partici.pate (Simon 2012). Data suggests that visitors to these types of cultural spaces often come from more affluent, middle-class backgrounds. They are more likely to live in urban areas, and are usually from the ethnically dominant group. Some, who are external to this group, may feel intimi.dated by these spaces and believe that they do not possess the required level of education or cultural proficiency, so that even when there is no entry fee, they simply do not feel that these places are for them. Who Takes Part in Online Citizen Science? Emily Dawson’s work (Dawson 2014) explores how some science muse.ums are arranged and how they make assumptions about (English) lan.guage use, exhibit design, and the knowledge a visitor already possesses about museums and how to use them. The end result being that these spaces can feel alien and unwelcoming to low income and minority ethnic groups. This phenomenon is also observed at other events that aim to engage ‘the public’ with science, and those who attend university open days, science festivals and public lectures also tend to be from the more educated and more affluent sections of the population, or the confident engagers of science (Curtis 2013; Jensen and Buckley 2012; Dawson 2018). The socio-cultural factors that influence attendance at museums, or public engagement events are also relevant for citizen science – particu.larly those projects that are organised in a top-down fashion by profes.sional scientists. The demographic data available does appear to suggest that online citizen science projects appeal to similar types of audiences, and many of those surveyed report regular attendance at other public engagement events. Even though scientists who organise these projects aim to make the task relatively straightforward and to translate webpages into other languages, it may not be enough to increase the appeal of the projects to those outside of the ‘confident engagers’ group or to those who are not part of the culturally dominant demographic. The project for.mats, the way projects look, how and where they are promoted, and the complexity of the language used, may all pose real barriers to some poten.tial participants in subtle ways that have yet to be considered or identi.fied. The demographic data collected so far relating to participation in online citizen science suggests that this merits further research. Another important concept when considering appeal and accessibility is cultural capital. This describes the kind of knowledge and skills that an individual brings to bear on a situation. For example, when visiting a museum, what does an individual already know about such spaces, and how do they go about using them. A related concept is social capital which derives from an individual’s social networks, the people they can influence, and be influenced by. Both cultural and social capital affect directly affect our habits and preferences both at home and in the wider community. More recently, the concept of science capital has been introduced (Archer et al. 2015). This refers to aspects of cultural and social capital that have a specific scientific focus and affect how much people involve themselves in science-related activities and events. As in cultural capital, social groups and related cultures are of paramount importance. Components of science capital include science literacy, consumption of science-related media, taking opportunities for informal science learning, knowing people who work in science-related jobs, valuing science-related skills in the labour market, and talking to others about science in infor.mal social settings (Edwards et al. 2015). The distribution of science capi.tal is unequal and directly affects participation in activities like citizen science as well as attendance at public engagement events, and informal learning spaces. Examining a project through the lens of science capital, may help project organisers think about how their projects are structured, and if there are steps that can be taken to widen their appeal. Conversely, involvement in citizen science could be a way to increase one’s science capital. Some researchers have realised this and directly targeted their projects at new audiences, or co-produced them with groups who would not traditionally take part in science-related activities. Democratising Science Some describe citizen science, and other types of public participation in science, as ‘win-win’ with multiple benefits garnered by both professional and non-professional scientists that have led to a democratisation of sci.ence. But what does democratising science actually involve? It suggests the incorporation of the principles of accessibility, transparency, and accountability, but more importantly, it assumes something about the distribution of power – that it is equitable. However, in most citizen science projects, with the exception of those that are community-based environmental justice projects that are organ-ised in a bottom-up fashion, the professional scientists are firmly in charge. The professionals ask the research questions, design the research protocols, and publish and disseminate the results. The ‘public’ are usu.Who Takes Part in Online Citizen Science? ally enrolled to help collect data, or carry out (often basic and repetitive) analytical tasks. This is not to say that there aren’t examples of meaningful collaborations between citizen and professional scientists, and occasions where citizen scientists can take the lead. All three of the projects I have researched have examples of this, which will be explored in greater detail in Chap. 7. Some projects have also made deliberate attempts to involve citizen scientists in other aspects of the research process. For example the Quench project was a Zooniverse initiative that sought to enlist Zooites in a greater level of data analysis and involve them in the production of an article for publication (Smethurst et al. 2017). However, this may be the exception rather than the norm for most participants. Given that carrying out scientific research, including the analysis and interpretation of complex data, requires specialists skills and knowledge, is this only to be expected? Is an equal partnership between citizen and professional scientists in the co-production of new scientific knowledge ever really possible? Perhaps it is not enough to involve ‘the public’ and describe that as democratic and positive in itself – the politics of knowl.edge creation must also be considered (Toogood 2013). It may be more useful to consider inclusion, rather than democratisa.tion, and citizen science certainly has the potential to include many people in the scientific process who wouldn’t normally have any involve.ment (Kasperowski et al. 2017). Yet the demographic data indicates that there is still work to do if online citizen science is to be more widely appealing and accessible to broader groups of participants. For some projects, capturing a diverse group of participants is crucial to its success. For example, Foldit relies on novel approaches to problem solving and benefits from participants who have no pre-conceptions about the sci.ence, or the scientific method. As one Foldit player told me, they come to the project without baggage and without pressure to produce results or publish papers. Inclusion and science capital are inter-related. Being more inclusive requires thinking about science capital – either in terms of who has it, but also in relation to building it. Scientists who set up projects often have public engagement or improving scientific literacy as one of their goals, and thus want to build upon the science capital of their participants. However, their projects need to be structured in ways that appeal to a wider range of potential participants and this means recognising that not everyone will respond to project parameters in the same way. More effort is needed to understand and address this significant barrier to diversity in science-related activities. We need to start by acknowledging that it exists. References Anderson, D. P. (2004). Public computing: Reconnecting people to science. In Conference on Shared Knowledge and the Web. Madrid, Spain. http://boinc. berkeley.edu/boinc2.pdf. Archer, L., Dawson, E., DeWitt, J., Seakins, A., & Wong, B. (2015). “Science capital”: A conceptual, methodological, and empirical argument for extend.ing bourdieusian notions of capital beyond the arts. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 52(7), 922–948. Barr, A. J., Haas, A. C., & Kalderon, C. W. (2017). Citizen scientist community engagement with the HiggsHunters project at the Large Hadron Collider. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.05148. Bian, L., Leslie, S.-J., & Cimpian, A. (2017). Gender stereotypes about intel.lectual ability emerge early and influence children’s interests. Science, 355(6323), 389–391. Bowden, R. (2012). Women increase their share of biological science PhDs in United States. In NatureJobs (Blog). http://blogs.nature.com/naturejobs/2012/01/13/ women-increase-their-share-of-biological-science-phds-inunited-states. Bradford, B. M., & Israel, G. D. (2004). Evaluating volunteer motivation for sea turtle conservation in Florida: University of Florida Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, EDIS. Burke, K. (2012). Behind the scenes of Foldit, pioneering science gamification. American Scientist, 100(6.) http://www.americanscientist.org/science/pub/ behind-the-scenes-of-foldit-pioneering-science-gamification. Camp, T. (2012). Computing, We Have a Problem…’. ACM Inroads no., 3(4), 34–40. Cesarsky, C., & Walker, H. (2010). Head count: Statistics about women in astronomy. Astronomy & Geophysics, 51(2), 2.33–2.36. ComRes, and RCUK. (2017). Research Councils UK – Public Insight Research. Research Councils UK. Who Takes Part in Online Citizen Science? Cossins, D. (2013, January). Games for science: playing scientist. The Scientist, http://www.the-scientist.com/?articles.view/articleNo/33715/title/ Games-for-Science/. Curtis, V. (2013). Contemporary issues in scientific engagement: Evaluating the motivations and expectations of those attending a public astronomy event. Communicating Astronomy to the Public, 13, 14–18. Dawson, E. (2014). “Not designed for us”: How science museums and science centers socially exclude low-income, minority ethnic groups. Science Education, 98(6), 981–1008. Dawson, E. (2017). Social justice and out-of-school science learning: Exploring equity in science television, science clubs and maker spaces. Science Education, 101(4), 539–547. Dawson, E. (2018). Reimagining publics and (non) participation: Exploring exclusion from science communication through the experiences of low-income, minority ethnic groups. Public Understanding of Science:0963662517750072. Deloitte. (2016). Women in IT jobs: It is about education, but also about more than just education. Report. https://www2.deloitte.com/global/en/pages/ technology-media-and-telecommunications/articles/tmt-pred16-tech.women-in-it-jobs.html. Divide, Working Group on the Digital Gender. (2017). Recommendations for action: Bridging the gender gap in Internet and broadband access and use. UN Broadband Commission for Sustainable Development. Dutton, W. H., & Blank, G. (2013). Cultures of the Internet: The Internet in Britain. Oxford: Oxford Internet Institute, University of Oxford. Edwards, R., Phillips, T., Bonney, R., & Mathieson, K. (2015). Citizen science and science capital: A tool for practitioners. Edited by University of Stirling. Stirling. Entradas, M., Miller, S., & Peters, H. P. (2013). Preaching to the converted? An analysis of the UK public for space exploration. Public Understanding of Science, 22(3), 269–286. ESA. (2016). Essential facts about the computer and video game industry. Entertainment Software Association (US). Green, T. (2012). Women over 30 are the most enthusiastic mobile gamers. Mobile Entertainment, http://www.mobile-ent.biz/industry/market-data/ women-over-30-are-the-most-enthusiastic-mobile-gamers/036312. Gugliucci, N., Gay, P., & Bracey, G. (2014). Citizen science motivations as discov.ered with CosmoQuest. Paper read at Ensuring Stem Literacy: A National Conference on STEM Education and Public Outreach (p. 437). Gurian, E. H. (2005). Threshold fear. In S. Macleod (Ed.), Reshaping Museum Space. London: Routledge. Haas, A. (2017). Higgs Hunters—A citizen science project for ATLAS. Journal of Physics: Conference Series, 898, 102002. Helsper, E. J. (2010). Gendered internet use across generations and life stages. Communication Research, 37(3), 352–374. Holohan, A., & Garg, A. (2005, July 1). Collaboration online: The example of distributed computing. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 10(4), JCMC1041. Howard Eckland, E. (2013). Why scientists think there are more women in biol.ogy than physics. In Gender & Society (blog). http://gendersociety.wordpress. com/2013/09/13/why-scientists-think-there-are-more-women-inbiology-than-physics/. Ipsos-MORI. (2011). Public Attitudes to Science. London: Ipsos MORI; Department for Business, Innovation and Skills. Ipsos-MORI. (2014). Public Attitudes to Science. London: Ipsos MORI; Department for Business, Innovation and Skills. Ipsos-MORI. (2016). Wellcome Trust Monitor, Wave 3. London: Wellcome Trust. Jensen, E., & Buckley, N. (2012). Why people attend science festivals: Interest, motivations and self-reported benefits of public engagement with research. Public Understanding of Science. https://doi.org/ 10.1177/0963662512458624. Kasperowski, D., Kullenberg, C., & Mäkitalo, Å. (2017). Embedding Citizen Science in Research: Forms of engagement, scientific output and values for science, policy and society. Retrieved from osf.io/tfsgh. Kende, M. (2016). Global Internet Report. The Economics of Building Trust Online: Preventing Data Breaches. Internet Society. Kennedy, B., & Funk, C. (2015). Public interest in science and health linked to gender, age and personality. Pew Research Center. http://www.pewinternet. org/2015/12/11/public-interest-in-science-and-healthlinked-to-gender-age.and-personality/. Kloetzer, L., Da Costa, J., & Schneider, D. K. (2016). Not so passive: Engagement and learning in Volunteer Computing projects. Human Computation, 3(1), 25–68. Könneker, C., & Lugger, B. (2013). Public science 2.0—Back to the future. Science, 342(6154), 49–50. Krebs, V. (2010). Motivations of cybervolunteers in an applied distributed com.puting environment: MalariaControl.net as an example. First Monday, 15(2). Who Takes Part in Online Citizen Science? Lieberoth, A. (2014). Getting humans to do quantum optimization - user acquisition, engagement and early results from the citizen cyberscience game Quantum Moves. Human Computation, 1(2), 219–244. Massey, R. (2015). Who are we now? Astronomy & Geophysics, 56(June), 3.15–3.17. Masters, K., EY, Oh, Simmons, B., Lintott, C., Graham, G., Greenhill, A., & Holmes, K. (2016). Science learning via participation in online citizen sci.ence. Journal of Science Communication, 15(3). McWhinnie, S. (2011). The Demographics and Research Interests of the UK Astronomy and Geophysics Communities 2010. London: Royal Astronomical Society. Nielsen, M. (2012). Reinventing discovery. The new era of networked science. Princeton: Princeton University Press. Priest, S. (2009). Reinterpreting the audiences for media messages about sci.ence. In R. Holliman, E. Whitelegg, E. Scanlon, S. Smidt, & J. Thomas (Eds.), Investigating Science Communication in the Information Age: Implications for public engagement and popular media. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Raddick, M. J., Bracey, G., Gay, P. L., Lintott, C. J., Cardamone, C., Murray, P., Schawinski, K., Szalay, A. S., & Vandenberg, J. (2013). Galaxy Zoo: Motivations of citizen scientists. Astronomy Education Review 12. http://scita.tion.aip.org/content/aas/journal/aer/12/1/10.3847/AER2011021. Reed, J., Raddick, J., Lardner, A., & Carney, K. (2013). An exploratory factor analy.sis of motivations for participating in Zooniverse, a collection of virtual citizen sci.ence projects. Paper read at Proceedings of the 46th Annual Hawaii International Conference on Systems Sciences, 7–11 January 2013, at Maui, HI. SETI@home. (2006). SETI@home poll results. http://boinc.berkeley.edu/slides/ xerox/polls.html. Simon, N. (2012). Come on in and make yourself uncomfortable. In Museum 2.0. (blog). http://museumtwo.blogspot.co.uk/2012/02/come-on-in-and.make-yourself.html. Smethurst, R. J., Lintott, C. J., Bamford, S. P., Hart, R. E., Kruk, S. J., Masters, K. L., Nichol, R. C., & Simmons, B. D. (2017). Galaxy Zoo: The interplay of quenching mechanisms in the group environment.. Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 469(3), 3670–3687. Stodden, V. (2010). Open science: Policy implications for the evolving phenom.enon of user-led scientific innovation. Journal of Science Communication, 9(1), A05. Tinati, R., & Luczak-Roesch, M. (2017). Wikipedia: A complex social machine by Ramine Tinati and Markus Luczak-Roesch with Martin Vesely as coordi.nator. ACM SIGWEB Newsletter, (Winter), 1–10. Toogood, M. (2013). Engaging publics: Biodiversity data collection and the geographies of citizen science. Geography Compass, 7(9), 611–621. https:// doi.org/10.1111/gec3.12067. Winn, J., & Heeter, C. (2009). Gaming, gender, and time: Who makes time to play? Sex Roles, 61(1–2), 1–13. World Community Grid. (2013). Member study: Findings and next steps. World Community Grid. http://www.worldcommunitygrid.org/about_us/ viewNewsArticle.do?articleId=323. 4 Motivation for Participation: From General Volunteerism to Online Citizen Science For anyone setting up an online citizen science project, it is important to know how to attract and retain participants if the research goals are to be achieved. What makes a project attractive and interesting for a potential participant? How can commitment and participation be maintained? Understanding motivation is key to the long-term success and sustain.ability of a project. Hundreds of thousands of individuals have participated in online citi.zen science projects over the past 10–15 years, and they do so without any monetary re-numeration making it an important voluntary activity. In considering motivation to participate in online citizen science (or indeed any type of citizen science), it is useful to reflect on some of the work that has been carried out exploring the motivations behind more general types of volunteering (e.g. in a hospital or other type of civic set.ting). Given the exclusively virtual setting of online citizen science, it is worthwhile to explore motivation to participate in other online systems of commons-based peer production such as contributing to Wikipedia, open maps, and even writing open-source software. Also, research on motivation within a formal education setting has shed light on the nature of extrinsic and intrinsic motivation which is particularly relevant to © The Author(s) 2018 V. Curtis, Online Citizen Science and the Widening of Academia, Palgrave Studies in Alternative Education, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-77664-4_4 online citizen science. Some of this work will be considered in this chapter and used to contextualise the findings of research that examines motiva.tion to participate in online citizen science. Motivation and Volunteerism Volunteering can be defined as discretionary behaviour such as assisting, comforting, sharing and co-operating intended to help people other than oneself. It is prosocial, non-obligated by family or friendship, and often situated within an organisational context (Sproull 2011). There is much research that explores motivation for this type of volunteering. Two stud.ies in particular have some relevance to citizen science. Work by Clary et al. (1998) suggests that people are motivated to vol.unteer because it fulfils certain functions that reflect important features of self and identity. For example, people choose an activity because it allows them to express the values that are important to them. In the case of (online) citizen science projects, those values may be associated with the importance placed upon science, or scientific research by the partici.pants. Volunteering serves a number of important functions such as allowing individuals to express values related to their altruistic and humanitarian concern for others. It also provides an opportunity for new learning experiences and to put one’s knowledge and skills into practice. There are individual benefits such as contributing to personal develop.ment or career enhancement. Volunteering on behalf of those less fortu.nate may also serve to alleviate one’s guilt about being more privileged than others. Research has shown that volunteers who serve in roles that match their own motivations will derive more satisfaction and enjoyment from their service and are more likely to continue. After studying community-based volunteering Batson et al. (2002) concluded that while motives are always influenced by the values of an individual, they can be situation specific. Furthermore, they can change over time – often quite quickly. They define motives as “goal-directed forces induced by threats or opportunities related to one’s own values” (p. 430). A goal can be either ultimate or instrumental. An ultimate goal is the valued state the individual is seeking to reach, while instrumental goals are sought as they act as stepping stones to one’s ultimate goals. This work highlights the changeable nature of personal motivations, and that an individual may have numerous motivations underlying their involve.ment in a voluntary activity. Batson et al. also postulate that voluntary activity has four different underlying drivers: egoism: where one acts to increase one’s own welfare; altruism where the ultimate goal is the increased welfare of others; collectivism when an individual is motivated by the increased welfare of a group or collective; and principlism where one is motivated by the ultimate goal of upholding some moral principle such as justice, or access to free information or software. Altruistic motivations are indeed relevant for online citizen science projects as participants give freely of their time in order to advance sci.ence and to make a contribution. Research that may not otherwise have been carried out is made possible by the goodwill of citizen scientist vol.unteers. Egoism and collectivism may also operate where involvement in projects may help to directly address or improve a local environmental situation, as can principlism if the rights of others to clean water, reduced sound pollution etc. are being addressed. Motivation and Other Types of Activity The work of Klandermans (2003) on the motivation to join social move.ments (such as the Peace Movement of the 1980s) has been used in some studies exploring motivation to participate in online citizen science. This framework includes four classes of volunteers’ motivations for participa.tion: collective motives (the importance attributed to the project’s objec.tives); norm oriented motives (expectations regarding the reactions of important others, such as friends and family); reward motives (benefits such as gaining reputation, or making new friends); and identification (identification with the group, and following its norms). Collective iden.tification and motives could be particularly relevant and the importance of the community has been highlighted by participants in both distrib.uted computing projects and distributed thinking projects. Individuals who take part in Galaxy Zoo projects occasionally refer to themselves as ‘Zooites’, while participants in Stardust@home refer to themselves as ‘Dusters’ (Westphal et al. 2014) suggesting that some online citizen science projects can foster the development of a community identity. The work of Klandermans was also considered by Nov et al. (2011a) in their work on Stardust@home participants and they identified the importance of ‘collective’ motives and community identity in their study group. There is a substantial body of work on motivation relating to formal education and the work of Ryan and Deci (2000, 2009) is particularly relevant to citizen science. In order to be motivated, an individual must be moved to do something. These motivations can be either intrinsic or extrinsic. Intrinsic motivation involves carrying out an action because it is inherently interesting or enjoyable. When intrinsically motivated, an individual is moved to act for the fun or challenge of an activity, rather than because of external ‘prods’, pressures or rewards. Some of the previ.ous studies examining online citizen science projects have shown that participants tend to choose projects that are in an area of science that they have an interest in (Nov et al. 2011a; Raddick et al. 2010). Individuals are more likely to become involved in a project that is inherently interest.ing to them, or is fun and/or challenging in some way. Thus they may be intrinsically motivated to take part. Extrinsic motivation is engaged when doing something leads to a sepa.rable outcome such as a reward, or a desirable reaction from a significant other to whom they feel (or would like to feel) a connection (e.g. family, peer group, society). Extrinsically motivated behaviours are not always inherently interesting and must be prompted. The points systems within some distributed computing projects or some citizen science games may offer such a reward for some, and has been highlighted as a motivation to participate in a previous study on distributed computing participants (Holohan and Garg 2005). However, extrinsic motivation is not merely a question of punishment or reward. It exhibits a range of expression that is related to the degree of autonomy experienced by an individual. This is also known as self-determination theory, which postulates that although an activity may not be interesting or appealing, it is personally endorsed in some way and the individual has a feeling of choice (Ryan and Deci 2009). This is in con.trast to compliance, when an individual carries out an activity because of an external control (e.g. avoiding punishment). Motivations based on compliance are not relevant when it comes to participation in online citizen science, however, extrinsic motivation based on introjection, which is defined by Ryan and Deci (2009) as ego involvement or the desire for approval from others, and identification, where an individual has identi.fied the value of the activity, do appear to be relevant. In the latter case, an individual may continue an activity they find dull or boring if they believe it may ultimately be of relevance or importance. Motivation and Commons-Based Peer Production A small number of researchers have likened some online citizen science projects (particularly distributed computing projects) to other types of online collaborations such as the production of open-source software, or the production of open content such as Wikipedia (Benkler and Nissenbaum 2006; Shirky 2009). These types of projects have become known as ‘commons-based peer production’, a term first coined by Benkler (2006). Commons-based peer production is made possible by the Internet and involves the collaboration of large numbers of people to provide information, knowledge or cultural goods without relying on economic factors or an over-riding management structure or hierarchy. Commons-based peer production is also highly granular and smaller tasks are allotted to distributed participants. Tight-knit online communi.ties working towards a common purpose may emerge. A small body of work exists in relation to the motivations of those who produce open source software, and those who write articles for shared content websites such as Wikipedia. Like online citizen science partici.pants, open-source software writers and Wikipedia contributors are not generally paid to produce content and their motivations for doing so have been attributed by researchers in this area to elements of both altru.ism and egoism (Chang and Yang 2009; Hars and Shaosong 2002), and also a commitment to the belief that there should be universal access to knowledge and software. Studies examining the motivation of Wikipedia writers and editors have shown that they tend to be motivated by more altruistic reasons, which are often based upon the belief that information and knowledge should be freely available to anyone (Forte and Bruckman 2005; Kuznetsov 2006; Nov 2007). Unlike open-source software, Wikipedia has no visible public recognition system that reflects individual contribu.tions. However, the history of every article and edit is available and authors often claim ownership of their articles and keep lists of their contributions. Within communities of Wikipedia editors, this may serve as a system of recognition and can therefore act as an extrinsic motivation (Ciffolilli 2003). Schroer and Hertel (2009) looked at Wikipedia as a social movement and used the approach of Klandermans (2003) to char-acterise motivations to participate. They identified a common underlying philosophy associated with the goal of free knowledge for everyone. Open-source software contributors on the other hand, are often motivated by more egotistical concerns such as establishing a reputation as a competent coder and the securing of employment opportunities (Hars and Shaosong 2002; Lakhani and Wolf 2005). The development of open-source software involves a review system that is similar in some ways to the academic peer review system, and software is released only if it is deemed good enough by the reviewers (Oreg and Nov 2008). However, altruism and an ideology centred on the free provision and access to software solutions are also strong motivations for many (Hertel et al. 2003; Lakhani and Wolf 2005; Nov 2007). Like Wikipedia, open-source software has parallels with other social movements, and a strong ideological core has also been observed within these communities (Hertel et al. 2003). Work on OpenStreetMap, a website where participants provide local geographic information that can be shared and edited, suggests that motivation to participate varies between those classified as ‘casual’ map.pers, and those considered ‘serious’ mappers (Budhathoki and Haythornthwaite 2013). Casual mappers were motivated by a belief in the general principle that mapping data should be freely available, while more serious mappers (those defined as ‘core’ and repeat contributors) were more orientated to community, learning, local knowledge and career motivations. The observation that motivation can vary depending on type or level of contribution is interesting and the implications for online citizen science will be explored in greater detail in Chap. 5 when motivation to participate in Foldit, Folding@home and Planet Hunters is considered in detail. Motivation to Participate in Contributory Ecology-Based Citizen Science Despite the fact that contributory ecology-based citizen science projects have been around for many decades, and that hundreds of projects have been organised, there are relatively few studies that have explored why people participate. Two of the earliest studies are based on conservation volunteers (all volunteering in the US), and both found that a desire to help, and interest in conservation issues were the most important motiva.tors for participants (Bradford and Israel 2004; King and Lynch 1998). More recent studies (Domroese and Johnson 2017; Geoghegan et al. 2016) have found that the desire to ‘help nature’ and to contribute to science were key motivators, as were learning about nature and the enjoy.ment associated with the activities. One of the more comprehensive studies to look at motivation and contributory citizen science not only explored motivations for joining a number of conservation-based projects, but also explored motivations for remaining with the project (Rotman et al. 2012). Using the motivational research of Batson et al. as a guide, Dana Rotman and her colleagues found that motivation was dynamic and temporal in nature. For exam.ple, an important primary motivator was a personal interest in the project combined with an interest in gaining something from the project (such as skills). These initial motivations are based on egoism, in that there is something to be personally gained from participation. As participants became more involved with the project over time, secondary motivations became more important. For example, factors relating to community involvement, and the opportunity to develop a better understanding of conservation issues were key in sustaining their involvement with the project. These motivations are based more on collectivism and altruism (Batson et al. 2002). Another important secondary motivator was recog.nition and attribution, and participants wanted to be given the appropriate credit for the work they had done. The temporal nature of motivation highlighted by this work is important as many citizen science projects (both more ecology-based and online) can continue for many months or even years, and organisers must make sure that participants remain inter.ested in the project (Cooper 2011; Lintott et al. 2008). Another observation of note in this work was that participants’ moti.vations could be affected by the attitude of the project scientists towards the citizen scientists. For example, some participants saw their involve.ment in the project as an opportunity to improve and extend their knowl.edge of specific habitats and species. This motivation appeared to be stronger where volunteers had greater contact with scientists in the field, and when educational opportunities were facilitated and encouraged. A study looking at a Portuguese biodiversity project (BioDiversity4All) also found that positive feedback from scientists give participants a feeling of satisfaction and of competence which leads to higher levels of motivation to participate (Tiago et al. 2017). The inter-relationship between the atti.tudes of professional scientists and the motivation of citizen scientists has been considered in relation to Foldit, Folding@home and Planet Hunters and will be explored in the next chapter. Previous Research Exploring Motivation and Online Citizen Science While the motivations behind general volunteering, participation in commons-based peer production and ecology-based citizen science proj.ects may provide some insight as to why people take part in online citizen science projects, it is important to note that these projects occur within a context which may be quite different. Online citizen science could be viewed as more opportunistic (e.g. there is flexibility with regard to time and place of participation unlike working for a charity, or collecting eco.logical data), and the projects may be more accessible in that they do not necessarily require specialist skills or knowledge to make a contribution – unlike writing a piece of open-source code, or an entry for Wikipedia. Participants in online citizen science projects are usually working within the research protocols and procedures imposed upon them by the project scientists, and are less likely to organise themselves as in open software or other open-content communities (Reed et al. 2013). All of these factors may have an influence on motivation; therefore, it is impor.tant to consider studies that have specifically looked at online citizen science. Studies that have reported findings relating to motivation of par.ticipants are listed in Table 4.1 along with the methodology employed to collect data. How representative these sample sizes are of the general population of project participants is unclear, and this must be taken into account when interpreting the findings. Six of these studies have examined the motivation to participate in a distributed computing project, while eleven studies have considered dis.tributed thinking projects. Holohan and Garg explored motivation to participate in two distrib.uted computing projects, SETI@home and GIMPS. This was part of a wider study that looked at online collaboration (Holohan and Garg 2005). Results relating to motivation suggested that study participants were mainly motivated by making a scientific contribution, followed by the competition with other participants (those who take part in distrib.uted computing projects are awarded points for each work unit their computer processes). It was also observed that study participants differ.entiated these two main motivations and appeared to present ‘official’ reasons for taking part which were more altruistic and based on contrib.uting to research, and ‘unofficial’ reasons which were based on competing with others for points, which perhaps they felt was a more unworthy reason for taking part. Another important motivator was the social aspect of participation including the interaction with other participants and the sense of community that could develop among teams. Some study par.ticipants also took part in these projects to gain greater technical knowl.edge about computers. Nov et al. (2010) conducted a survey of 274 randomly selected SETI@ home participants. As in previous research on OpenStreetMap, they linked survey findings on motivation to actual levels of participant con.tribution as determined by their activity logs. They considered intrinsic and extrinsic motivations, and also whether these motivations were Table 4.1 Summary of published studies exploring motivation in online citizen projects Author/year  Project  Data collection method  Holohan and  Distributed computing projects  Online qualitative Survey  Garg (2005)  including SETI@home (Search  (n=37)  for Extra Terrestrial  Online quantitative survey  Intelligence) and GIMPS  (n=323)  (Great Internet Mersenne  Prime Search)  Nov et al. (2010) SETI@home  Online quantitative survey  (n=274)  Krebs (2010)  malariaControl.net and other  Online quantitative survey  distributed computing  using Likert scales  (BOINC) projects  (MalariaControl.net,  n=1097; BOINC projects,  n=408)  Darch and  Climateprediction.net  Open-ended qualitative  Carusi (2010)  questionnaire exploring  participant retention.  Feedback also obtained  from forum threads  (n=35)  World  World Community grid  Online quantitative survey  Community  collection of distributed  (n=15 627) no details of  Grid member  computing projects  survey format, followed  study (2013)  by 6 focus group sessions  (n=unknown)  Nov et al. (2010) SETI@home  Online survey (n=274).  Motivation explored in  relation to level of activity  recorded in project  activity log.  Nov et al.  Stardust@home  Online quantitative survey  (2011a)  (n=139)  Raddick et al.  Galaxy Zoo  Qualitative Interviews  (2010)  (n=22) and information  about motivations from  826 forum posts  Raddick et al.  Galaxy Zoo  Online quantitative survey  (2013)  (n= 10 708)  Gugliucci et al.  Cosmoquest  Online quantitative survey  (2014)  (n=334)  (continued) Author/year Project Data collection method Eveleigh et al. Old Weather (Zooniverse) 18 participants asked about (2014) motivation relating to gamified features of the project.(survey n=545, interviews n=18) Lieberoth et al. Quantum Moves Interviews of 3 very active (2014) participants Jackson et al. Planet Hunters Ethnographic study of 3 (2015) highly active players. Curtis (2015) Foldit (n=37) Online survey (containing Folding@home (n=407) both closed and open Planet Hunters (n=118) questions), semi.structured interviews, participant-observation. Tseung et al. Mark2Cure Online quantitative survey (2016) (n=78) Cox et al. (2017) Numerous Zooniverse projects Online quantitative survey (VOLCROWE Project) (n=1915) based on Galaxy Zoo, Planet Hunters, ‘volunteer functions Penguin Watch, Seafloor inventory’ Explorer, Snapshot Serengeti Tinati et al. Eyewire 989 answered survey (2017) question about why they participate. ‘self-oriented’ or ‘project oriented’. They found that ‘self-oriented’ factors relating to personal enjoyment and enhancement of reputation were important motivators, but that this was not statistically related to contri.bution levels. However, being affiliated to a team was positively related to contribution levels, and this may suggest that being in a team leads to greater levels of participation, possibly due to the enjoyment that partici.pants get through interacting with others and working toward a common goal. This study is perhaps one of a very small number of studies on online citizen science that attempts to explore a link between motivation and level of contribution. Krebs (2010) looked at the motivations of participants in MalariaControl.net, a project where participants’ computers run epide.miological models of malaria infection. She also looked at the motivations of a smaller group of participants who participate in BOINC (Berkeley Open Infrastructure for Network Computing)1 distributed computing projects. Using a previously developed list of 10 potential motivations (that were either intrinsic or extrinsic), Krebs found that wanting to contribute to a community (also referred to as ‘solidarity’), and getting involved in a particular cause (such as helping advance understanding of a disease) were the most important motivators for MalariaControl.net participants. These two motivations were also the most important for the group of general BOINC participants. Less important motivators for MalariaControl.net participants were extrinsic motivators relating to enhancing professional experience, networking, learning and knowl.edge sharing. These more extrinsic motivations have been found to be of greater importance in studies looking at those who write open-source software (Hertel et al. 2003; Lakhani and Wolf 2005; Oreg and Nov 2008). Krebs’ study also suggests that recognition of a volunteer’s contribution is impor.tant and many respondents stated that it was important to provide tan.gible rewards (e.g. points). Respondents further highlighted the importance of feedback and communication from the organisers, and knowing what went on behind the science. Survey feedback also empha.sised the importance placed on the social component of the project as some participants like to interact with others. However, the degree of interaction between participants, or between the participants and the organisers was not explored in any detail. Darch and Carusi (2010) carried out a study on retention of volun.teers at Climateprediction.net, a distributed computing project where global climate simulations are run on participant’s computers. This study also considered whether different types of contribution had an impact on motivation to continue participating. They found that ‘supercrunchers’, individuals who contributed greatly to the project (and were most likely hardware enthusiasts or overclockers) were greatly motivated by points and ‘prestige’. While participants described as ‘lay public’ with lower lev.els of contribution, were more interested in the educational aspects of the project, and motivated by contributing to what they believe to be impor.tant research. Motivation to participate was explored in a large survey of participants in the World Community Grid, a collection of distributed computing projects overseen by the IBM Corporation that focus mainly on humani.tarian issues such as cancer epidemiology, the search for disease biomark.ers, and carrying our research calculations on potential drug candidates (World Community Grid 2013). This survey of over 15,000 participants found that almost 70% of respondents participated because they want to support scientific research in important areas of health. The next most important reason (cited by 58%) was to make use of their unused com.puting power. This observation suggests the presence of hardware enthu.siasts and overclockers within the population of World Community Grid participants (although they are not singled out in this report). The fact that all the results generated through the World Community Grid are publicly available was also important to some respondents. As observed in the MalariaControl.net study, World Community Grid participants also wanted more information about the impact of their contributions and regular updates from the scientists and researchers involved in the projects. This suggests that knowing that one’s contribution is meaning.ful is important to project participants, as is some kind of acknowledge-ment or recognition from the project managers. In addition to studies on distributed computing projects, research on participant motivation has been carried out on distributed thinking proj.ects. Many of these have examined projects from the Zooniverse. Raddick and co-workers (2013) have carried out two studies exploring the motivations of GalaxyZoo participants. GalaxyZoo was one of the first distributed thinking projects and involves the classification of galax.ies according to a number of easy-to-recognise physical characteristics such as shape, and number of spiral arms. In the first study, the group interviewed 22 participants using a (qualitative) grounded theory approach to analyse feedback. They derived a list of 12 important motiva.tors such as ‘astronomy’, ‘community’, ‘contribute’ and ‘discovery’ based on participant responses. One important observation was that each par.ticipant had several reasons for taking part in the project. In this small group of participants, an interest in astronomy, and the desire to contrib.ute to the project were among the most important motivators. Feedback to a forum post asking why individuals were taking part was also examined and the same two motivations (interest in astronomy and desire to con.tribute) were found to be the most important among the 826 responses. The list of 12 motivations derived from participant feedback during the first study was further explored using a larger group of participants. A more detailed quantitative follow-up survey was constructed, and over 10,000 GalaxyZoo participants responded (Raddick et al. 2013). This survey showed that the most important primary motivation for participa.tion was making a contribution to science (this amounted to nearly 40% of the responses), followed by an interest in astronomy (just over 10% of responses). The possibility of making a new discovery was also important for about 10% of respondents. Citizen scientists have been responsible for several serendipitous dis.coveries in Galaxy Zoo. A new class of galaxy, known as ‘green pea galax.ies’ was discovered when a hard-to-classify image was brought to the attention of the project community by several participants. One of the project’s more active participants, Dutch school teacher Hanny Van Arkel, discovered a new type of astronomical body called a quasar ionisa.tion echo among the images. This original discovery became known as Hanny’s Voorwerp (Dutch for Hanny’s object), and Galaxy Zoo partici.pants then went on to identify 19 such objects. Other astronomy -based projects within the Zooniverse have seen a number of significant discov.eries made by citizen scientists including extra-solar planets, evidence of gravitational lenses, and new stars. In 2014, Old Weather, another Zooniverse project was examined. In this project, volunteers transcribe written weather observations from naval records from the early twentieth century, in order to help digitise data and contribute to research exploring changes in global weather pat.terns over the last century (Eveleigh et al. 2013). The authors were inter.ested in whether elements of gamification used in this project helped to motivate and sustain participation. In old weather, there is a system of ranking where a participant may progress from ‘Cadet’ through to ‘Captain’ for each ship where they transcribe the records. The person who transcribes the most records for a particular ship is the Captain, although this position can be lost if another participant transcribes more records. Based on interview feedback from 18 participants, the authors found that this feature of Old Weather, while motivating for some, put other participants off. Some participants found it de-motivating and thought that it sacrificed quality for quantity and trivialised the work. This research demonstrates that offering these types of rewards may not always work and not everyone responds in a similar way. Jackson et al. (2015) carried out an in-depth ethnographic study of three highly committed participants in Planet Hunters (also from the Zooniverse). The aim of this study was to explore what made some par.ticipants go beyond the core task of trying to observe evidence of extra-solar planets, and engage more deeply with a project. Such participants perform many important functions within a project community such as forum moderation and helping new participants. All three participants were highly supportive of the project goals and wanted to assist the scien.tists in the analysis of their data. They all had a strong interest in astron.omy. Interviews and observations of this small group showed that their deeper involvement was motivated by their desire to learn more, and share this knowledge with other volunteers. This was facilitated by the technical parameters of the project – an important finding that suggests that motivation and interaction between participants can be helped (or hindered) by the way a project is designed. For example, interaction between participants in Foldit is greatly enhanced by the presence of real-time internet chat (Curtis 2015). This feature helps to develop the com.munity of active participants which can be an important motivator for sustained involvement. Cox et al. (2017) explored the relationship between motivations, level of activity and retention of participants in five different Zooniverse proj.ects. They used a survey instrument based on the Volunteer Functions Inventory which divides motivation to volunteer into six distinct catego.ries: protective (a way of escaping from problems); enhancement (volun.teering as a way to feel better about oneself); social (a means for interaction with others); values (volunteering as an expression of personal values); understanding (learning and gaining new insights); and career (as a means to build and enhance one’s career). They found that the most engaged participants were strongly moti.vated by a desire to enhance their understanding and knowledge. Volunteers who participated more actively were also motivated by a desire for escapism (the protective motive). There was a strong association between engagement level and personal values (e.g. the project helped participants to express values that were important to them), but there were negative associations between the level of activity and the career motivation and, interestingly, the social motivation. This could be explained by the fact that Zooniverse tasks are usually repetitive and often carried out in isolation. Cox et al. also explored how motivations vary over the duration of a participants’ involvement in a project, and found that they can change dramatically. The understanding (learning) and val.ues motivations became less important to those who had been involved in the projects for a longer time period, but were important during the early stages of involvement. Over time, participants were more motivated by an opportunity for ‘escape’. This fluidity of motivation has important consequences for the way projects are designed and how project teams engage with communities of participants over time. CosmoQuest is an online citizen science platform that has hosted sev.eral astronomy projects that allow participants to map parts of the solar system (the Moon, Mars, Mercury, and the minor planet Vesta). In addi.tion to helping scientists with the analysis of data, Cosmoquest also sup.ports both formal and informal learning through online classes, forums and blogs and is promoted as an educational tool for teachers. A survey completed by 334 participants found that, as in Galaxy Zoo participants’, interest in astronomy was the most important factor that motivated par.ticipation. This was followed by a desire to contribute to original scien.tific research (Gugliucci et al. 2014). The study also found that many of the respondents were amateur astronomers and used the project as a source of information to support their hobby, and as an opportunity for informal learning. The research group involved in exploring motivation in SETI@home participants, also investigated the motivations of Stardust@home partici.pants with the aim of finding out whether motivation was related to an individual’s levels of contribution to the project (Nov et al. 2011a). On this occasion, a modified framework based on Klanderman’s framework of voluntary participation in social movements was used to categorise motivations. Survey results of 139 participants showed that ‘collective’ motives (i.e. the importance attributed to the project goals) and ‘intrinsic’ motives (i.e. the enjoyment of taking part) were the most commonly cited reasons for taking part. Intrinsic motivation was also found to be associ.ated with ‘participation effort’. The more the participant enjoyed the experience of taking part in Stardust@home, the more they contributed. In a further analysis, this group compared the motivations of the same 139 participants in Stardust@home with a larger sample (1843) of SETI@ home participants, and explored whether task granularity was related to motivation (Nov et al. 2011b). They defined low granularity tasks as more ‘passive’ involving less participant input, and this included participating in SETI@home. Higher task granularity was defined as more cognitively ‘active’ and would include tasks such as image classification or analysis (such as the Stardust@home task where participants look for traces of inter-stellar star dust in video images). Results of this study suggested that task granularity was positively correlated with motivation levels, but that additional research was needed to determine the direction of this relation.ship. However, the participants of SETI@home that were included in the study may have been overclockers or hardware enthusiasts. If this was the case, then their participation could not really be considered ‘passive’ and their potential inclusion in the study make the comparison between SETI@home and Stardust@home participants problematic. In the highly gamified mapping project Eyewire, participants help to create a 3-dimensional map of retinal neurons in order to help researchers understand how neurons connect to process visual information. Ultimately, this information could be applied to the development of arti.ficial intelligence. Mapping tasks are awarded points (there is a leader board) and participants can take part individually or as part of a team. Like distributed computing projects and some citizen science games such as Foldit, there are periodic challenges and competitions. In 2017, the project managers carried out a survey in order to explore motivation to participate and playing behaviour (Tinati et al. 2017). Responses from just under 1000 participants suggest that the main motivation is to make a contribution to the project, followed by an interest in science. The third most common reason for participating was because it was fun, suggesting that many Eyewire participants (unlike some of the participants of Old Weather) like the gamified features of this project. This was particularly true of younger participants and suggests that some gamified project fea.tures could be used to appeal to a particular demographic. While some online citizen science projects are gamified to varying degrees, the number of citizen science games – that is, a research project packaged as an online multiplayer game- is still relatively small. This may be due to the complexity of these projects, and because they require col.laboration with games developers to get off the ground (Curtis 2014). Three of the best-known games (so far) are Foldit, EteRNA and Phylo and they are all based within the biological sciences. In 2013 another citi.zen science game was launched called Quantum Moves. This was devel.oped by researchers from the University of Aarhus in Denmark, and is based on quantum mechanics. In this game, participants play against computer algorithms and move a simulated atom to help design a quan.tum computer. In a preliminary set of interviews with three committed players, referred to by the project organisers as ‘heroes’ (as opposed to the less committed ‘flâneurs’), two stated that being able to contribute to meaningful research was an important motivation for participating in this, potentially very difficult, game (Lieberoth et al. 2014). The game also attracts individuals who are interested in physics – although they do not always have any formal education in this area. In fact, the organisers have observed, that the best performers are those with fewer formal quali.fications in physics. Mark2Cure is a project where the biomedical literature is surveyed by volunteers looking for information that is of relevance to researchers (Tsueng et al. 2016). This requires some training in the associated vocabulary and an understanding of the concepts to be identified and annotated. This task is usually carried out by specialists, but as the lit.erature is rapidly growing, Mark2Cure was launched in order to see if non-specialists could perform this task as accurately (after some train.ing). While assessing this, the organisers also examined some of the motivations of participants via an online survey. Responses from 78 participants suggest that most were motivated by their desire to further science. The second most commonly cited reason (by about half of respondents) was to learn. Mark2Cure was targeted toward a specific group, the rare diseases community, who would have had an interest in the biomedical literature, and may have seen this project as an oppor.tunity to learn more about conditions which directly affected them or their loved ones. Interestingly, the desire to learn is not often in the top two or three reasons that participants give for taking part in an online citizen science project, at least according to the published literature so far. Learning can occur both informally (incidentally through participation) and more for.mally where scientists provide opportunities or materials to teach and train participants- either about the associated science, or about the proj.ect task. Through their participation, citizen scientists not only improve scientific literacy, but they can gain a deeper insight into the process of conducting research and how scientists work (Jennett et al. 2016). However, as discussed in Chap. 3, many participants come to these proj.ects already with formal qualifications in science, and an underlying interest in new scientific research. While there has been evidence of learning in many different types of citizen science projects (Bonney et al. 2009; Kloetzer et al. 2016; Masters et al. 2016; Price and Lee 2013), the work of Jackson et al. (2015) and others, suggests that motivation to learn may be a feature of more involved or sustained participation over time. My own work on Foldit, Folding@ home and Planet Hunters suggests that opportunities for learning are greatly enhanced where the technical features of a project allow commu.nities to develop and interact, and to a lesser extent, by introducing an element of competition. The latter facilitates the formation of teams, potentially leading to the development of more cooperative communities of participants working together toward a common goal (Curtis et al. 2018). Opportunities to increase scientific literacy were also found to be important to the scientists who set up Foldit, Folding@home and Planet Hunters, and were important secondary motivators for their involvement in citizen science. There is now a substantial body of literature that explores motivation to participate in online citizen science. The studies outlined in this chap.ter demonstrate that while a number of key factors may stimulate partici.pation, commonalities can be observed. The opportunity to make a meaningful contribution to scientific research is perhaps the most impor.tant motivation behind the involvement of citizen scientists. This is fol.lowed by the attraction to projects in scientific disciplines that are of personal interest and relevance. The desire for learning is not obviously an important motivator that initiates participation, but it may be more important in sustaining participation over time, as is the opportunity for social interaction. While there is some data relating to how motivations change over time, and how level of activity is related to motivation, more work in these areas is needed. Furthermore, there has been very little work on the motivations of the professional scientists and developers who set up and manage online citizen science projects, and how the relation.ship between professional and citizen science can impact on long-term participation. The next chapter will see some of these aspects of motiva.tion explored in greater detail among Foldit, Folding@home and Planet Hunters participants. Note 1. BOINC stands for Berkeley Open Infrastructure for Network Computing. BOINC software (or ‘middleware’) is now used in most distributed com.puting projects. It is based on the software originally developed for SETI@ home. References Batson, C. D., Ahmad, N., & Tsang, J. A. (2002). Four motives for community involvement. [Article]. Journal of Social Issues, 58(3), 429–445. https://doi. org/10.1111/1540-4560.00269. Benkler, Y. (2006). The Wealth of Networks. How social production transforms markets and freedom. New Haven: Yale University Press. Benkler, Y., & Nissenbaum, H. (2006). Commons-based peer review and vir.tue. Journal of Political Philosophy, 14(4), 394–419. Bonney, R., Cooper, C. B., Dickinson, J., Kelling, S., Phillips, T., Rosenburg, K. V., & Shirk, J. (2009). Citizen science: A developing tool for expanding science knowledge and scientific literacy. Bioscience, 59(11), 977–984. Bradford, B. M., & Israel, G. (2004). Evaluating volunteer motivation for sea turtle conservation in Florida. University of Florida Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, EDIS. Budhathoki, N. R., & Haythornthwaite, C. (2013). Motivation for open col.laboration: crowd and community models and the case of OpenStreetMap. American Behavioral Scientist, 57(5), 548–575. https://doi.org/10.1177/ 0002764212469364. Chang, J., & Yang, J. (2009). What drives people to contribute in peer production projects? A review of the participating motivation of peer producers. Paper pre.sented at the Third International Symposium on Intelligent Information Technology Application Workshops. Ciffolilli, A. (2003). Phantom authority, self-selected recruitment and retention of members in virtual communities: The case of Wikipedia. First Monday, 8(12). Clary, E. G., Snyder, M., Ridge, R. D., Copeland, J., Stukas, A. A., Haugen, J., & Miene, P. (1998). Understanding and assessing the motivations of volun.teers: A functional approach. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74(6), 1516–1530. Cooper, S. (2011). A framework for scientific discovery through video games. Doctor of Philosophy, University of Washington. Cox, J., Eun Young Oh., Simmons, B., Graham, G., Greenhill, A., Lintott, C., Masters, K., & Woodcock, J. (2017). Doing good online: The changing rela.tionships between motivations, activity and retention among online volun.teers. Nonprofit and voluntary sector quarterly. http://eprints.whiterose.ac. uk/115831/. Curtis, V. (2014). Online citizen science games: Opportunities for the biological sciences. Applied & Translational Genomics, 3(4), 90–94. Curtis, V. (2015). Motivation to participate in an online citizen science game: A study of Foldit. Science Communication, 37(6), 723–746. https://doi. org/10.1177/1075547015609322. Curtis, V., Holliman, R., Jones, A., & Scanlon, E. (2018). Online citizen sci.ence. Participation, motivation, and opportunities for informal learning. In C. Herodotou, M. Sharples, & E. Scanlon (Eds.), Citizen inquiry. Synthesising science and inquiry learning (pp. 7–24). Abingdon: Routledge. Darch, P., & Carusi, A. (2010). Retaining volunteers in volunteer computing projects. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 368(1926), 4177–4192. Domroese, M. C., & Johnson, E. A. (2017). Why watch bees? Motivations of citizen science volunteers in the Great Pollinator Project. Biological Conservation, 208, 40–47. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biocon.2016.08.020. Eveleigh, A., Jennett, C., Lynn, S., & Cox, A. (2013, October 2–4). “I want to be a Captain! I want to be a Captain!”: Gamification in the Old Weather Citizen Science Project. Paper presented at the Gamification 2013, Stratford, Ontario. Eveleigh, A., Jennett, C., Blandford, A., Brohan, P., & Cox, A. L. (2014). Designing for dabblers and deterring drop-outs in citizen science. Paper read at Proceedings of the 32nd annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 2985–2994. Forte, A., & Bruckman, A. (2005, November 6–9). Why do people write for Wikipedia? Incentives to contribute to open-content publishing. Paper presented at the Proceedings of GROUP 2005, Sanibel Island, Florida. Geoghegan, H., Dyke, A., Pateman, R., West, S., & Everett, G. (2016). Understanding motivations for citizen science. Final Report on Behalf of UKEOF, University of Reading, Stockholm Environment Institute (University of York) and University of the West of England. Gugliucci, N., Gay, P., & Bracey, G. (2014). Citizen science motivations as discov.ered with CosmoQuest. Paper presented at the Ensuring Stem Literacy: A National Conference on STEM Education and Public Outreach. Hars, A., & Shaosong, O. (2002). Working for free? Motivations for participat.ing in open-source projects. International Journal of Electronic Commerce, 6(3), 25–39. Hertel, G., Niedner, S., & Herrmann, S. (2003). Motivation of software devel.opers in Open Source projects: an internet-based survey of contributors to the Linux kernel. Research Policy, 32, 1159–1177. Holohan, A., & Garg, A. (2005). Collaboration online: The example of distrib.uted computing. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 10(4), Article 16. Jackson, C. B., Østerlund, C., Mugar, G., Hassman, K. D., & Crowston, K. (2015). Motivations for sustained participation in crowdsourcing: Case studies of citizen science on the role of talk. Paper presented at the System Sciences (HICSS), 2015 48th Hawaii International Conference on. Jennett, C., Kloetzer, L., Schneider, D., Iacovides, I., Cox, A., Gold, M., Fuchs, B., Eveleigh, A., Methieu, K., Ajani, Z., & Talsi, Y. (2016). Motivations, learning and creativity in online citizen science. Journal of Science Communication, 15(3), Article no. A05. King, K. N., & Lynch, C. V. (1998). The motivation of volunteers in the nature conservancy – Ohio Chapter, a non-profit environmental organization. The Journal of Volunteer Administration, 16, 5–11. Klandermans, B. (2003). Collective political action. In D. O. Sears, L. Huddy, & R. Jervis (Eds.), Oxford handbook of political psychology. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Kloetzer, L., Schneider, D., & Da Costa, J. (2016). Not so passive: Engagement and learning in volunteer computing projects. Human Computation, 3, 25–68. Krebs, V. (2010). Motivations of cybervolunteers in an applied distributed com.puting environment: MalariaControl.net as an example. First Monday, 15(2). Kuznetsov, S. (2006). Motivations of contributors to Wikipedia. SIGCAS Computers and Society, 36(2), Article No. 1. Lakhani, K. R., & Wolf, R. G. (2005). Why hackers do what they do: Understanding motivation and effort in free/open source software projects. In J. Feller, B. Fitzgerald, S. A. Hissam, & K. R. Lakhani (Eds.), Perspectives on free and open source software. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press. Lieberoth, A., Pedersen, M. K., Marin, A. C., Planke, T., & Sherson, J. F. (2014). Getting humans to do quantum optimization-user acquisition, engagement and early results from the citizen cyberscience game quantum moves. Human Computation, 1(2), 221–246. Lintott, C. J., Schawinski, K., Slosar, A., Land, K., Bamford, S., Thomas, D., . . . Vandenberg, J. (2008). Galaxy Zoo: Morphologies derived from visual inspection of galaxies from the Sloan Digital Sky Survey. [Article]. Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 389(3), 1179–1189. https://doi. org/10.1111/j.1365-2966.2008.13689.x. Masters, K., Oh, E., Simmons, B., Lintott, C., Graham, G., Greenhill, A., & Holmes, K. (2016). Science learning via participation in online citizen sci.ence. Journal of Science Communication, 15(3). Nov, O. (2007). What motivates Wikipedians? Communications of the ACM, 50(11), 60–64. Nov, O., Arazy, O., & Anderson, D. (2010). Scientists@home and in the back.yard: Understanding the motivations of contributors to digital citizen sci.ence. (1666501). Retrieved 16 April 2013, http://ssrn.com/abstract=1666501. Nov, O., Arazy, O., & Anderson, D. (2011a). Dusting for science: Motivation and participation of digital citizen science volunteers. Paper presented at the iCon.ference 2011, Seattle, Washington. Nov, O., Arazy, O., & Anderson, D. (2011b). Technology-mediated citizen science participation: A motivational model. Paper presented at the Fifth International Conference on Weblogs and Social Media. Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence. Oreg, S., & Nov, O. (2008). Exploring motivations for contributing to open source initiatives: The roles of contribution context and personal values. Computers in Human Behavior, 24, 2055–2073. Price, C. A., & Lee, H. (2013). Changes in participants’ scientific attitudes and epistemological beliefs during an astronomical citizen science project. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 50(7), 773–801. Raddick, J., Bracey, G., Gay, P. L., Lintott, C. J., Murray, P., Schawinski, K., . . . Vandenberg, J. (2010). Galaxy Zoo: Exploring the motivations of citizen sci.ence volunteers. Astronomy Education Review, 9(1). Raddick, M. J., Bracey, G., Gay, P. L., Lintott, C. J., Cardamone, C., Murray, P., . . . Vandenberg, J. (2013). Galaxy Zoo: Motivations of citizen scientists. Astronomy Education Review, 12. Reed, J., Raddick, J., Lardner, A., & Carney, K. (2013, January 7–11). An exploratory factor analysis of motivations for participating in Zooniverse, a collec.tion of virtual citizen science projects. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 46th Annual Hawaii International Conference on Systems Sciences, Maui. Rotman, D., Preece, J., Hammock, J., Procita, K., Hansen, D., Parr, C., . . . Jacobs, D. (2012, Febuary 11–15). Dynamic changes in motivation in collab.orative citizen-science projects. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work, Seattle, Washington, DC. Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. (2000). Intrinsic and extrinsic motivations: Classic definitions and new directions. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 25, 54–67. Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. (2009). Promoting self-determined school engage.ment. Motivation, learning and well-being. In K. R. Wentzel & A. Wigfield (Eds.), Handbook on motivation at school. New York: Routledge. Schroer, J., & Hertel, G. (2009). Voluntary engagement in an open web-based encyclopedia: Wikipedians and why they do it. Media Psychology, 12, 96–120. Shirky, C. (2009). Here Comes Everybody: How change happens when people come together. London: Penguin. Sproull, L. (2011). Prosocial behaviour on the Net. Daedalus, 140(4), 140–153. Tiago, P., Gouveia, M. J., Capinha, C., Santos-Reis, M., & Pereira, H. M. (2017). The influence of motivational factors on the frequency of participa.tion in citizen science activities. Nature Conservation, 18, 61. Tinati, R., Luczak-Roesch, M., Simperl, E., & Hall, W. (2017, August). An inves.tigation of player motivations in Eyewire, a gamified citizen science project. Computers in Human Behavior, 73, 527–540. Tsueng, G., Nanis, S., Fouquier, J., Good, B., & Su, A. (2016). Citizen science for mining the biomedical literature. Citizen Science: Theory and Practice, 1(2). Westphal, A. J., Stroud, R. M., Bechtel, H. A., Brenker, F. E., Butterworth, A. L., Flynn, G. J., . . . Postberg, F. (2014). Evidence for interstellar origin of seven dust particles collected by the Stardust spacecraft. Science, 345(6198), 786–791. World Community Grid. (2013). Member study: Findings and next steps (Vol. http://www.worldcommunitygrid.org/about_us/viewNewsArticle. do?articleId=323). World Community Grid. 5 A Closer Look at Motivation: Citizens and Scientists Previous research in online citizen science has revealed that there are a number of key motivations that initiate participation, namely, a desire to contribute to authentic research, and an existing interest in science. Understanding motivation is crucial if professional scientists want to develop projects that will appeal to a critical mass of participants, and encourage active participation. By exploring three projects in depth and over a period of several years, I was able to build up a detailed picture of why people take part, and perhaps more importantly, why some con.tinue their involvement over long periods – sometimes many years. I was also able to explore the motivations of those who set up and run online citizen science projects, an area that has not yet been fully inves.tigated in previous work. This feedback from scientists and developers has helped to fill in this gap in our understanding and has demonstrated the extent to which some scientists collaborate with project partici.pants. The involvement of some scientists in citizen science has had a tremendous impact on how they approach their research and engage with non-specialists. © The Author(s) 2018 V. Curtis, Online Citizen Science and the Widening of Academia, Palgrave Studies in Alternative Education, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-77664-4_5 Exploring Motivations Through Participant-Observation One of the key features of this research is the incorporation of an ethno.graphic approach to data collection. I became a participant in each proj.ect, regularly carrying out the project tasks and contributing (where I could) to the online community via forums and real-time discussions. Being a participant observer is a direct way of obtaining data by observ.ing what people actually do. It has a number of advantages, namely, that it can provide access to the background culture and can enable a detailed description of behaviours and situations that may not otherwise be observed. As a participant in Foldit, I spent many weeks learning how to play. This required interaction with other players, both among the general population of active players, and with my team mates. This experience brought many insights into why Foldit appeals to some individuals, and why they continue playing. Firstly, learning to play Foldit is incredibly challenging, and some players relish the opportunity to master the tools of the game. However, the level of difficulty acts as a significant barrier to participation, and many who try Foldit it give up after completing the first few tutorial puzzles. For the more experienced players there is the continual challenge (and intellectual reward) of adapting to an evolving game and learning about new tools, and the science behind the puzzles. New puzzles are presented that address emerging issues, and give players the opportunity to contrib.ute to current research needs (e.g. understanding the latest flu virus, or the Ebola virus). The fact that Foldit is unlike more recreational com.puter games is of importance, and many justify the amount of time they invest in it to friends and family by the fact that they are actually contrib.uting to important scientific research. Some forum moderators spend several hours every day in the global chat area helping new players. Other seasoned players have constructed a Foldit wiki with the solutions to the introductory puzzles, along with other useful tips for playing. These players seem especially keen to iden.tify and develop ‘new talent’. These more experienced players also take A Closer Look at Motivation: Citizens and Scientists part in regular online chats with the scientists and developers making suggestions for improvements to the game (e.g. new tools and functions), reporting problems with the game, and finding out more about the research. This small team of participants are highly committed to the game, and are motivated to make it a success. Many have used Foldit as an opportunity to learn informally (and more formally in some cases), about protein biochemistry. This is reflected in the often quite technical language that experienced players use to dis.cuss the puzzles with other players as they work together to solve them. Some players have participated in a competition known as CASP – criti.cal assessment of techniques for protein structure prediction. This is a biannual competition involving research labs from all over the world where the aim is to predict the structure of a protein molecule while only knowing the sequence of its constituents. Teams are divided into two groups: techniques involving human intervention, and techniques that are fully automated. Foldit first entered a (human) team in 2008 with tremendous success. Teams of Foldit players have continued to contrib.ute to successive competitions. In addition to the intellectual challenge and the opportunity to make significant contributions to research, active players are also part of a tight-knit community. This is especially true within teams where some players have worked together for several years. Conversation between team mates (and in the global chat area to a lesser extent) is not limited to Foldit-related topics. As a result, friendships develop, and players return each day to a familiar community of like-minded individuals. Of the three projects, Foldit was perhaps the most involving from a participant-observer perspective. Learning to play requires some interac.tion with the playing community, and this is facilitated by real-time Internet chat which gives interactions more immediacy. Interaction in Planet Hunters in quite different and occurs through asynchronous forums. Also, the task of classifying light curves while looking for evi.dence of extrasolar planets is carried out in isolation. There aren’t any teams, and a participant could become involved without any direct inter.action with other participants. However, one of the advantages of observ.ing online citizen science projects with online forums is that they are an archive of all interaction, and some discussion threads can offer an insight into motivations for participants. The Planet Hunters forum contained such a thread where new participants introduced themselves with many stating why they were taking part. Feedback from over 100 participants revealed that making a contribution to science is a key motivator. The main goal of the project, and the importance of finding a new planet that could be a potential home to future generations was highlighted by a significant number of individuals. Opportunities for learning more about astronomy, and chatting to other participants were also important. Another area for (asynchronous) interaction is the Planet Hunters blog where the project scientists update participants about the latest develop.ments in the related science, and in the Kepler mission. Participants can leave comments to these posts which provide an opportunity to find out more about that particular update. These posts are usually restricted to scientific discussions. A more social dimension to this project, as well as other projects on the Zooniverse platform, was evident when I attended one of the regular Zooniverse meet-ups in Oxford. About 50 ‘Zooites’ gathered for a day of presentations from scientists, which concluded with a meal at a local pub. Many of those who attended had been involved with the Zooniverse since it began with the launch of Galaxy Zoo in 2007 and were active in several projects at a time, sometimes as modera.tors. This was a friendly community with a common interest in making a success of the Zooniverse and of helping the scientists conduct their research. Being a participant-observer in Folding@home was challenging as the majority of interaction between participants was related to overclocking and project software. Not having this expertise limited my involvement in discussions with active participants on a technical level, and as more passive participants are less likely to use the project forum there was little opportunity to interact with them. Therefore, I was more of an observer, rather than a participant-observer. However, by reading and participating occasionally in discussions on the official Folding@home forum, and team and hobbyist forums, I was able to gain some key insights into motivation to participate. While the opportunity to fully develop their hobby and take part in competitions appealed to many in the overclocking community, there was also a recognition of the importance of the research goals behind A Closer Look at Motivation: Citizens and Scientists Folding@home. A discussion thread in one of the team forums was called ‘why we fold’ and it detailed many personal experiences of the diseases that the Pande Group researches (including Parkinson’s Disease and Alzheimer’s disease), and participants spoke about loved ones who had been lost. Some included photos, memorials and poems to create virtual shrines. Further interesting observations were made when a change to the way points were to be awarded was announced. This change meant that some participants were no longer eligible for a particular points scheme, as it was to be limited to machines with a larger processing capacity. Over 700 comments (some quite hostile) were posted on the Folding@home forum immediately after the announcement was made. Many were upset because they would not be able to compete for large amounts of points, and felt that their contribution to the project was being taken for granted. In one of the team forums, some of the participants debated whether or not to leave the project, or to go on strike. In light of this reaction, some of the changes were reconsidered by the project team. However, it clearly dem.onstrated the importance of points as a reward and as a motivation for continued involvement in Folding@home within the overclocking com.munity. It also highlights the importance of being valued in a project, and knowing that one’s contribution is appreciated and rewarded in a way that is meaningful. Feedback from the Online Surveys All of the participants who completed the online surveys (562 across the three projects) were asked why they participated in the project and what they liked best about taking part. Table 5.1 illustrates the main reasons for taking part and most respondents gave more than one reason for their involvement. The numbers in brackets indicate how many respondents gave this answer. For all three of the projects making a contribution is one of the most important motivations for participation. Although it’s interesting to note that in Planet Hunters, a previous interest in the science (more specifically astronomy) was mentioned by more of the respondents as a motivating factor for their participation. A background interest in science was also an important motivator for Foldit players. An interest in the science and the desire to make a contribution have been highlighted by practically all of the previous research that has explored motivation to participate in online citizen science including distributed thinking, distributed computing and in other online citizen science games such as Quantum Moves (Cox et al. 2017; Krebs 2010; Lieberoth et al. 2014; Raddick et al. 2010; Tinati et al. 2017). However, a background interest in the science was not mentioned by as many Folding@home respondents, although in this group, a back.ground interest in computing was key and is likely the result of the involvement of the overclocking community in distributed computing. Table 5.1 Motivation for participation in Foldit, Folding@home and Planet Hunters Foldit (n=37)  Folding@home (n=407)  Planet Hunters (n=118)  1. Contributing to research (22). 2. Interest in science (13). 3. Intellectual challenge (10). 4. Curiosity (8).  1. Making a contribution (to research or a worthy cause) (207). 2. Fully utilise computing power/hardware enthusiast (128). 3. Personal experience of diseases being researched by project (74). 4. Admire goals of the project (68).  1. Interest in the science (56). 2. Contributing to research (40). 3. Chance to make a discovery (26). 4. Goals of project important to them (11).  The projects were quite different in format, so not surprisingly, some motivations highlighted by respondents showed some variation between the projects. For example, the intellectual challenge of the game was important for some Foldit respondents, as was their curiosity about the project (perhaps relating to the re-packaging of a scientific research prob.lem into a game format). In Planet Hunters, the opportunity to discover an exoplanet was important for over a fifth of respondents. This opportu.nity for discovery is promoted by the managers of the Zooniverse plat.form (it applies to several of their astronomy-based projects) and the descriptor of Planet Hunters on the Zooniverse website is ‘Find planets around stars’. In Folding@home, the involvement of overclockers meant that the opportunity to fully utilise computer processing power was an important motivator for a large proportion of these respondents. A Closer Look at Motivation: Citizens and Scientists As Folding@home is concerned with research into the underlying causes of many significant diseases, a significant proportion of respon.dents stated a personal experience of a disease such as Alzheimer’s, Parkinson’s or cancer (either they or a friend or family member was affected) as a reason for joining the project. While Foldit is also con.cerned with how protein folding may relate to disease, this was not given as a reason for participation by many of the respondents to the Foldit survey suggesting that its format as a game may be more important when it comes to attracting new participants. When asked what they most liked about the project, the answers almost mirrored the responses to why they take part. In essence, what they like most about the projects was that they permitted them to make a contribution to science. The feedback from Foldit was slightly different in that one of the things participants liked most about playing, was that it enabled them to work with others as part of an online community. Folding@home participants also mentioned the ‘ease of use’, which is likely to be related to the use of Folding@home as benchmarking tool for the community of overclockers and hardware enthusiasts. In order to understand motivations further, I asked survey respondents whether they thought they should be rewarded for their participation, and if so, what form should it take. Most Foldit respondents stated that they did not think that players should be offered an extra incentive. The view that rewards could harm the cooperation within the Foldit commu.nity was expressed by several respondents. More concrete rewards would probably increase the incentive, but would likely also reduce cooperation, so it’s a double-edged sword. (FD 5) Similarly, Planet Hunters participants felt that participation was its own reward, although most felt that anyone who helped to discover a new planet should be acknowledged in some way. One interesting find.ing was that almost a third of responses to this question also suggested that those who contribute the most should be acknowledged, thus dem.onstrating that among the community of Planet Hunters participants, there is some understanding that contribution is not equal among participants. More than half of the Folding@home respondents felt that there was no need to reward participants beyond what is already offered (e.g. points for completed work units and the chance to participate in a scientific research project), and that participation is its own reward. However, over a hundred participants wanted to see something extra offered such as virtual badges, better quality certificates (currently participants can download a certificate of participation at any time), tours of the labs for significant contributors, or an annual convention for participants. Interview Feedback Interviews with project participants were used to explore motivations in greater detail and in an attempt to understand what kept some individu.als participating in their projects over many months or even years. A total of 46 interviews were carried out: 10 with Foldit players; 18 with active participants from Folding@home (e.g. those who were either overclock.ers or among those who belonged to the Beta Testers1); and 18 from Planet Hunters. Interviews with Foldit players highlighted the importance of the Foldit community to this small group of dedicated players. Being part of a diverse community with a shared goal is one of the most enjoyable aspects of their participation and interviewees stated that working with others towards a common goal, and getting to interact with participants from all over the world are key motivators for their individual participation in the project. These individuals have made important virtual friendships that play an important role in sustaining their participation over months and years. Some of the players who I spoke to had been with Foldit from the beginning and are still taking part. A few of the interviewees expressed a desire to help, and had been per.sonally affected by a disease caused by protein mis-folding (such as Alzheimer’s). Foldit may be able to shed more light on such diseases in the future, and many wanted to be actively involved in helping to find a cure. A family member fell ill with dementia and I wanted to help by searching for drug treatments. There were none and I stumbled upon Foldit. (FD8) Despite the more serious side of Foldit and its potential applications, several respondents stated that playing Foldit is a lot of fun, and a source of enjoyment. The game is great fun. And it is nice that it might help science. (FD3) Another important motivation is the opportunity to take part in authentic scientific research, and to make a contribution to a project with tangible outcomes. The fact that this could be achieved without a scien.tific qualification was very important to one of the interviewees. ..the real point is that Foldit simply allows us folks without the proper CVs, and would crawl over broken glass to participate given half the chance, an opportu.nity to do this stuff. It’s that simple. (FD4) Some interviewees enjoy the intellectual challenge of the game, and enjoy the opportunity to develop their skills. I am also intellectually curious about the progress the Foldit approach to solving this problem has taken….I now have a cursory understanding of the forces at work and some theories about what might make a successful strategy. (FD1) Community and motivation are closely related within this small popu.lation of Foldit players, as is the desire to make an intellectual contribu.tion to the project. Motivations are also in turn, determined by the personal attributes, characteristics and interests of the players. Attributes such as perseverance, creativity, scientific inquisitiveness were referred to by several of the players as being part of crucial skill-set needed to be a successful Foldit player. One player referred to as the “right stuff ”, while another referred to it as a “state of mind”. The interviews carried out with Folding@home participants highlighted the views and motivations of those who were more significant contribu.tors to the project, and focussed mainly on the community of overclock.ers. There is very little published material on this group of hobbyists, so this was a good opportunity to learn more about them. Like participants in Foldit and Planet Hunters, overclockers were also motivated to partici.pate by wanting to make a contribution and help scientists. As a child, I would dream of being a scientist but as I grew up, that dream just remained a dream. Thus, when the opportunity presented itself to me to help scientists find a potential cure to cancer, Alzheimer’s and other diseases, I was overjoyed and spent a considerable amount of time participating in the F@H project. (F@H7) Having a distributed network to do the ‘dirty work’ for them is immensely help.ful. It allows them to do more science ‘for free’ and also focus on analysing the data. We facilitate the science. (F@H9) Other views related to the science carried out by the Pande Group were also highlighted and the value the interviewees placed on the quality of the science became apparent. Some respondents stated that the work the Pande Group do is at the cutting-edge of science, while other interview.ees highlighted the fact that the results of the research were open, and available for any other research group to use. Therefore, it is not only the opportunity to contribute to science that is important to some of these participants, but also the opportunity to contribute to a project that is open to other researchers and where the results are regularly published. However, contributing to science is not always the primary motivator, and many overclockers take part because they want to develop their hobby by learning from others and use Folding@home as a means for pushing their machines to the maximum. This was neatly summarised by one participant: All of the money, electricity and my time is going toward a good cause while at the same time I get to explore new hardware and configurations. (F@H6) So everyone is happy – both the scientists and the overclockers. However, some overclockers, while initially drawn to Folding@home because of their interest in computer hardware, then find themselves becoming more interested and motivated by the research objectives. This was encapsulated in the comments from one of the interviewees. Generally, I see this group in two camps: A. Those that are folding because of their hatred of disease and wanting to eliminate it from the face of the earth. B. Those that fold because they want to build the best computer they can and tweak and twist it to get every last drop of performance. I started out in camp #2…but the more I learned about what I was actually getting into, I’ve migrated to camp #1. (F@H9) Sub-communities of overclockers that are independent of Folding@ home were important to those interviewed, and created an enjoyable experience that helps to sustain their participation. I fold to be part of a greater community in the Folding@home world – in this case, lately, as a member of the EVGA folding team where I have developed several years’ worth of friendships. (F@H8) The sense of community was also mentioned by members of the Folding@home Beta Testers, as was the desire to make a contribution. I am helping others with like-minded values. Everyone there is trying to help improve folding beyond just folding…I would argue that I participate far more answering questions and testing than I do actually folding. The being helpful is the more significant reason. (F@H10) Some liked the fact that being one of the Beta Testers meant that you had greater access to the project group, and got a sneak preview of what was coming next. I really like the closer interaction with the researchers. Getting some insight into the inner workings of folding and providing them with valuable feedback is very fulfilling. (F@H11) Interview feedback from Planet Hunter participants reinforced the findings from the online survey that the prospect of discovery and the opportunity to contribute to an area of science that interested them were powerful motivators for participation. Interestingly, a significant pro.portion of those interviewed were amateur astronomers, and one had a degree in astrophysics. This was a surprise to the some in the project team, who didn’t expect much of an interest from the amateur astron.omy community. One aspect of participation that was raised by Planet Hunters inter.viewees was the opportunity to re-connect to science. While many had a formal education in science, none were working as professional scientists, despite an ambition to do so when they were younger. Some spoke long.ingly, and quite movingly, about their unrealised ambition to be profes.sional scientists. it is sad to think that the time spent learning at school and university is gener.ally wasted by many people like me who are forced into other fields and occupa.tions. I would like to do more in the sciences, and I think this is a great way to start. (PH10) Participating in Planet Hunters (and other Zooniverse projects) gave them an opportunity to re-connect with science. Some of the interviews expressed their gratitude for being able to do that. Conversely, some par.ticipants take part in Planet Hunters because they can become involved in research without any background training or knowledge. One respondent left school at an early age with no formal qualifications, and stumbled upon Planet Hunters during retirement. With growing experience and confidence, this respondent eventually co-discovered a new exoplanet. Working on this project has really stretched my horizons….it has been great fun and given great satisfaction, the fact that I have been credited with the discov.ery of a new planet added to the experience. (PH3) While both Foldit and Folding@home had active project communi.ties, this was not as apparent in Planet Hunters. I don’t participate in the community, but I know it is there. (PH12) The time I want interaction is when I find an image I can’t figure out in the way desired. There are facilities for this on the sites but they are a bit cumber.some. They do not lead to group analysis really. (PH4) This is largely the result of the independent nature of the project task, and the lack of teams or a competitive element. Feedback from the interviewees indicated that there is not an especially strong sense of community and that it is perhaps other factors such as making a contribution and the possibility of making a discovery that sustains participation over time. Models of Motivation As outlined in Chap. 4, a number of motivational frameworks have been considered previously in relation to general volunteering, writing open-source software, contributing to Wikipedia, as well as taking part in other types of citizen science. These frameworks have helped to explore the ‘bigger picture’ of motivation to participate in citizen science, and place it within the wider context of volunteering. A broader consideration of motivation is of value when considering what makes a successful project, and provides an insight into how participation can be sustained over time. A number of these frameworks were revisited in light of the data collected from Foldit, Folding@home and Planet Hunters participants with the aim of developing a new framework which would also be rele.vant to other online citizen science projects. The work of Ryan and Deci (2000, 2009) on extrinsic and extrinsic motivations was perhaps the most relevant to my observations and data. Intrinsic motivation exists when an activity is enjoyable, or when it promotes feelings of fulfilment and competence. There is no need for an external reward because the activity is inherently interesting and fulfils some of our basic psychological needs such as feeling capable or useful. Extrinsic motivation operates whenever an activity is carried out to attain some kind of reward, or to avoid punishment, or if the task itself is not especially interesting or fulfilling. However, extrinsic motivation is not merely a question of punishment or reward, and it exhibits a range of expression that is related to the degree of autonomy experienced by an individual. This is also known as ‘self-determination theory’, which maintains that although an activity may not be inter.esting or appealing, it is personally endorsed in some way and the individual has a feeling of choice (Ryan and Deci 2009). Put another way, external motivations are internalised and become more intrinsic. For example, if there is a desire for approval from others, or if the individual has identified that there is value in the activity. In the latter case, an individual may continue an activity they find dull or boring if they believe it may ultimately be of relevance or importance (this is evident in survey feedback from Planet Hunters participants, several of whom described the task as monotonous). While the approach of Ryan and Deci was relevant for many of the motivations for participation articulated by the citizen scientists I observed, not all were entirely explained by this work. For example, one of the most commonly cited reasons for participation, the desire to help and to make a contribution to scientific or medical research, is based on an altruistic motivation or empathy that has more in common with other types of more general ‘community-based’ voluntary behaviour as detailed by Clary et al. (1998) and Batson et al. (2002). In addition to altruism, another important internal motivation is the desire to work with, and be a part of, a community; and to cooperate and collaborate (in the case of online citizen science) as part of distributed social group. Previous work on open-source software has highlighted an important external motivator that relates to ‘expected future returns’ (Hars and Shaosong 2002). Within the context of open-source software, this means that an individual may be rewarded for their involvement sometime in the future in the form of revenues from related products and services, or career advancement through marketing and showcasing their technical skills (Hars and Shaosong 2002; Hertel et al. 2003; Oreg and Nov 2008). There appears to be a parallel to this motivation among some participants of the online citizen science projects investigated here, particularly those who have a more personal stake in the outcome of the research. For example, many respondents to the Folding@Home survey stated that their involvement in the project was the direct result of a loved one (or they themselves) being affected by one of the diseases being researched by the Folding@Home scientists. Some of the respondents to the Foldit sur.vey also expressed this sentiment. Many of these individuals also hoped that their involvement would result in the development of a cure or ther.apies for these conditions. Such a motivation could also be considered ‘enlightened self-interest’. Based on this new research and a wider consideration of the work by others in this area, a new framework has been developed (Table 5.2) that seeks to incorporate all of the major motivations that have been articu.lated by participants in a hierarchy of motivations. Level 1  Level 2  Level 3  Level 4  Internal Factors  Intrinsic motivations  Enjoyment  Relaxing Visual appeal Fun  Fulfilment  Background interest in science Participation in authentic research Allows creativity Learning opportunity  Competence  Intellectual challenge Using skills Formal qualifications not required Different ways to contribute  Altruism  Making a contribution  Contributing to scientific research Contributing to a worthy cause Helping scientists  Community  Interaction with others  Work with others toward common goal; Make friends  External factors  Extrinsic motivations  ‘Ego enhancement’  Points Rank Making a discovery wider recognition(e.g. appearing on publications) Positive feedback from scientists  Identification  Goals of the project are important  Expected future returns  Medical / scientific breakthroughs  Research publications New drug therapies Cures  Table 5.2 Motivational framework for online citizen science At Level 1, motivations can be classified as either internal factors, which are rooted within the individual, or they can be classified as factors that are external to an individual. At Level 2, internal factors can be sub.divided into intrinsic factors, altruism and community, while external factors can be divided into extrinsic motivations and expected future returns. These can be further sub-divided (Level 3) into a number of ele.ments that have been identified by Ryan and Deci as the components of intrinsic and extrinsic motivation. A further breakdown of altruism, community involvement and expected future returns, and their relevance to online citizen science projects has also been illustrated at this level. Level 4 represents the lowest ‘granularity’ of motivation. All study partici.pants articulated motivations that were either Level 4 or Level 3. Most participants in this research have expressed more than one reason for taking part in their project and they can incorporate both internal and external factors. However, internal motivations appear to be dominant in the case of online citizen science, as making a contribution (altruism), and an interest in the science (the intrinsic motivation of fulfilment) are the two most commonly cited reasons for participation. ‘Ego enhance.ment’ rewards in the form of points, rank and reputation appear to be of greater importance to the community of overclockers who participate in Folding@home, and for some Planet Hunters participants who want the recognition associated with making a discovery. Results from previous studies suggest that the motivations expressed by participants of other online citizen science projects are very similar to those expressed by the participants of this research. As such, this model can be applied to other online citizen science projects. Scientists and developers considering setting up an online citizen science project, or those already managing one, may find this framework useful for mapping the motivations of their own (prospective) participants. The Motivations of Project Scientists and Developers The motivations of those involved in setting up and managing online citizen science projects, and their views about working with citizen scien.tists, have not been considered in previous research in much detail. It is important to note that in addition to professional scientific researchers, online citizen science projects also involve other types of specialist such as software developers and games developers. As part of this research, I spoke to both scientists and developers about their roles in the projects, why they take part, and why they think their participants are drawn to their projects. It hasn’t always been easy to gain access to projects teams, and in some cases it took many months and many attempts to talk to some of the project scientists and developers. Some were more open than others about their experiences. However, it is often possible to get a sense of the rela.tionships between professional and citizen scientists by what isn’t addressed as much as by what is freely articulated. Unsurprisingly scien.tists and developers are protective of their projects, and must be able to attract and retain participants if their projects are going to be sustainable in the long term. The software and games developers have a very active role in Foldit, and much of the interaction between participants and project ‘manage.ment’ is with them. I interviewed three Foldit developers, all of whom worked with both the Foldit playing community and with the biochem.ists at the Baker Lab at the University of Washington. The project devel.opers have played a crucial role in the design, development, and implementation of the game. They liaise with the player community and respond to technical issues that can arise from time to time. From my observations of the player forum, and the transcripts of the developer’s chats, a player (particularly a member of the core group) is more likely to come into contact with one of the developers than with one of the scien.tists from the Baker Group. When questioned about the role of the project team, the developers agreed that one of their main roles was to help advance scientific research. One of the developers questioned was actively involved in communicat.ing and promoting Foldit. There have been numerous news and maga.zine articles written about Foldit since it was launched in 2008, as well as features on radio and television. The appearance of these items, particu.larly on radio and television often result in an increase in the number of registered players and people generally taking a look at the game. However, as there is a lengthy learning process associated with Foldit, most of this interest does not result in a significant increase in the playing community. According to two of the developers interviewed, most poten.tial participants are ‘lost’ in the tutorial puzzles, and each successive puz.zle has far fewer players than the last. The developers are able to observe where the biggest losses occur, and work to try and address this. There appeared to be a general acceptance among the developers that Foldit will not appeal to all who take a look at it. One developer spoke of focussing on the current core community, and keeping the game interesting for these individuals. The developers spoke of the importance of being aware of all the dif.ferent motivations for participation in Foldit, and how these factors needed to be taken into consideration during the design of the game. The team had clear views as to why they thought people got involved. One of the main driving forces is the altruism of players, many want to advance biochemistry and see Foldit as way to do so. Some players have loved ones who are afflicted by diseases that have or may be addressed by Foldit. (FD Team 1) The desire to contribute to science was also considered to be a main motivating factor by the other two developers. Being able to contribute was thought to provide the players with a sense of fulfilment. Foldit was also described as a “game with a purpose”, and players could play knowing that they aren’t just wasting their time, but are actually making meaning.ful contributions to scientific research. Two of the developers spoke of the fact that players hear about Foldit through science-based channels, such as popular science magazine articles, in the science or technology sections of newspapers, or science-based websites, so it naturally attracts those that are interested in science. The importance of the community, and the chance to make friends online was recognised. As Foldit is a large community, many subgroups have formed. These groups can be more personal and intimate, fostering another reason to come back, to meet and talk with your new found friends in the group. (FD Team 1) Despite the fact that these developers do not directly use the scientific data generated by Foldit players, their contribution is crucial to the suc.cess of the project, and they too have motivations behind their involve.ment. The general benefits of citizen science were of importance to the developers. For example, one of the advantages of opening this research up to the wider community is that it fosters diversity in the approach to the protein puzzles. Participants bring different skills and problem solv.ing experience to the game which has been beneficial to the scientists at the Baker Lab. One of the developers stated that it is this diversity that has helped the game to advance scientific research. I think the main benefit of working with ‘citizen scientists’ is the diverse set of knowledge and skills you have at your disposal. (FD Team 1) One developer wanted to work with those who were external to academia. I wanted to work on a project that was not only being used for research pur.poses, but also had a wider reach among the non-research community. (FD Team 1) A developer who played a major role in the development of Foldit, was more enthusiastic about the use of games in scientific research, and was clearly keen to explore this in his work with Foldit. He spoke about how public perception of computer games had changed over time and that there was a greater appreciation of the other areas (apart from entertain.ment) where games could be useful. Like Foldit, Folding@home also relies on the input of developers as well as scientists. Two members of the Folding@home project team were interviewed, including the founder of the project and a developer who has been closely involved with the project for many years, and had worked with both scientists and software developers. The founder of Folding@home wrote much of the initial project soft.ware, and is now responsible for the overall management of the project. I’ve done about everything. In the beginning, I managed and wrote some of the code. Now it’s management of the project as a whole. (F@H Team 1) When asked what the main role of the project team is, or should be, he stated that it was: To do the best science we can. People are donating a vast resource to us and in the end, we will be judged by the impact of our scientific output. (F@H Team 1) Folding@home was set up as an “ambitious scientific research project”. It requires significant computing power, and these needs are best addressed through a distributed computing framework. We realized that there was an opportunity to do something grand. We had the algorithmic ideas in place and needed the raw horse power to push it forward’ (F@H Team 1) This individual also spoke about the research output of the project, and that his work had been “fundamentally advanced ”. The developer I interviewed also spoke about the research output of the project, and that the impact of this work was something that moti.vated his continued involvement in the project. It’s truly dedicated to the betterment of mankind. (F@H Team 2) He also enjoyed the intellectual challenge of his involvement, and some of the friendships that he made as a result. It satisfies one personal goal: to be mentally challenged to learn more and to figure things out. It satisfies another personal goal, to do good for mankind. I’ve developed a number of good friendships, though that wasn’t part of my original goals. (F@H Team 2) This response demonstrates that like citizen scientists, the motivations of project managers can change over time. Such factors (such as making friends) may not have played a role in motivating their initial involve.ment, but can play an important role in sustaining their involvement over many months or (in this case) years. Both individuals were asked directly why they thought people became involved in Folding@home. They felt that there were numerous motiva.tions in operation. For some it is the science – our goals and the ability to make a contribution. For some, it is the scale of the whole project and the interest in computers and what can be done with them. (F@H Team 1) This refers to the community of overclockers and hardware enthusi.asts. Both interviewees acknowledged the social aspect of participation, and that this is important for some. I think the ability to connect, whether that be to make a difference, to do sci.ence, or to connect with other people – these are all important areas. (F@H Team 1) That many participants had been affected by the diseases being researched by the Folding@home scientists was referred to, and that their participation made them feel as though they were making a difference. The developer I interviewed also believed that the publications produced as a direct result of the project, and the fact that it was not profit driven were also important to participants. The multitude of publications prove that it is good science. It’s not driven by a profit-oriented company but contributes to the open uses of scientific advance.ments. (F@H Team 2) Some of the difficulties associated with managing a large citizen sci.ence project were outlined. Key among these was the effort it took to balance close involvement with the project community, with focussing on the scientific output. This sentiment has been expressed by most of the project scientists who I have spoken to, as they try to balance the demands of carrying out research, with the demands of ‘managing’ large numbers of citizen scientist volunteers. I interviewed four members of the Planet Hunters project team (all scientists), and one of the main benefits of their involvement is that they get help with research that relies on human observation. The tasks on Planet Hunters cannot be carried out with total reliability by a computer (yet), and human participants have identified exoplanet candidates that have not been detected by the Kepler computer algorithms. The involve.ment of thousands of volunteers also enables very large datasets – which are increasingly common in astronomy – to be analysed. One scientist described citizen science as a new research tool that could complement other methodologies. I would say it’s transformed how I do my research. Citizen science is very much a tool we can use for large datasets, particularly in astronomy – and we’re head.ing towards more data. (PH Team 2) From the scientists’ responses, it appears that the primary motivation to participate in online citizen science projects like Planet Hunters, is that it provides an effective way to carry out, or ‘crowdsource’ a relatively straight.forward analytical task that requires little training or supervision. Time that would have been spent by scientists on these tasks is now freed up for more in-depth analysis of the data. However, this is not the only motivation for their involvement, and it is evident that for the Planet Hunters scientists, the opportunity for public engagement and outreach is also appealing. I think it’s an interesting way to do outreach, I think it brings people into the scientific process and the actual organic component of it… (PH Team 2) This scientist also saw Planet Hunters as enabling outreach at the same time as she carried out her research thus ‘killing two birds with one stone’. It also made her consider different avenues of communication. …it’s made me more creative in how I do outreach. I can satiate doing outreach as well. Having live chats and things like that. We don’t need to do it, but I think we should do it….is there something new I can do with Planet Hunters volunteers….? (PH Team 2) It is evident that the scientists enjoy their participation in Planet Hunters. It’s fun! Both in terms of engagement and in terms of research. (PH Team 3) This same scientist also spoke of the enjoyment associated with the intellectual leadership involved in managing the project. The project team felt that one of their main responsibilities was to ensure that that the project site is well maintained, and functioning. Another important obligation was to ensure that something is done with the results generated by citizen scientists. Most of the scientists empha.sised the importance of not wasting anybody’s time. …we’ve been entrusted with 18 million classifications so the main thing is we have to get as much science out of that as possible. I feel that the worst thing would be to waste people’s time. For Planet Hunters I feel very responsible that this happens. (PH Team 3) The project scientists also have a sense of responsibility towards the community of Planet Hunters. They feel a need to be present and available to answer questions, and to disseminate information about the projects and the results. However, not all of the scientists get involved with interacting with the community to the same degree. Taking the time to interact with Planet Hunters participants can be time-consuming, and many of those in Zooniverse scientific teams are full-time researchers who are under “pressures to publish” and to pro.duce results. Members of the project team were very interested in the motivation of the participants and have their own opinions as to why people get involved. The opportunity to get involved in authentic scientific research was considered to be important by the scientists and this authenticity was felt to be one of the defining characteristics of the Zooniverse projects. ...People get that they’re data and actual graphs – but they understand the abstract concept of looking for the signature of another world. (PH Team 2) That fact participants like to contribute and help out was acknowledged. I think it’s the sense that ‘today I did this thing’. You see that in the way the users, certainly the advanced users, talk about the project. I think there’s a pride in it. (PH Team 3) Another point that arose during my discussion with one of the Planet Hunter scientists is the fact that citizen scientists may have a different idea of what constitutes scientific research to those of the professional scientists. This scientist referred to the notion of “Hollywood science” where people had an unrealistic view of what actually constitutes scien.tific research, and perhaps as a result, had unrealistic expectations regard.ing the project, or of the project scientists. This feedback was of significance, and suggests that existing views about scientific research may have an impact on the duration of participation. This could provide an interesting direction for further research. Balancing Motivations and Research Objectives It appears that the primary motivator for the project teams I interviewed is to tap into the pool of citizen scientist volunteers to get help with sci.entific research either through mass analysis of data, or by increasing the diversity of problem-solving approaches. Citizen scientists help profes.sional researchers to carry out tasks that would be highly time-consuming and repetitive, thus freeing them up for more in-depth analysis that requires more specialist knowledge and skills. Citizen scientists carry out tasks that (at this point in time) cannot be carried out by computer algo.rithms, and which rely on distinctly human approaches to problem solv.ing. In this sense, citizen scientists are providing an invaluable source of free labour to these groups of scientists. Scientists are also able to meet other professional objectives through their involvement in online citizen science projects. For example, as a way to engage with their volunteers and provide an inside view of professional scientific research. While ‘engagement’ in this context more often than not refers to educating volunteers, or telling them about the research pro.cess, some of the project scientists try and encourage them to become more involved in the actual research process by providing access to raw data (e.g. the Kepler data in Planet Hunters). Foldit scientists and developers also regularly engage with the players and hold online ‘chats’ that any participant can attend and pose questions to the project, or make suggestions as to how the project can be improved. Members of the Baker Lab have been involved in the production of blog posts, podcasts and short films about the project that are regularly fea.tured on the Foldit website. External presentations made by scientists have also been shared with players. However, the Foldit developers inter.viewed stated that because there are so many participants to engage with there isn’t always the time (or the human resources) to do this enough justice. Over time, and perhaps as a result of this, the Foldit community has become a self-organising research community, with a small number of players occasionally working with the project team. For some of the project scientists, a conflict between interacting with citizen scientists and carrying out their ‘day jobs’ is evident. It can be difficult for project teams to work with or manage large groups of citi.zen scientists, and for some, unforeseen issues and conflicts have been a problem. Some of the interview feedback from active participants in all three projects and observations of some of the project discussion threads, imply that some have expectations about the amount and type of feedback they should be getting from project teams. When these expectations are not met, there is a chance that project team members may feel conflicted about their involvement, and that participants may lose interest and stop contributing. This suggests that governance needs to be considered in the early stages of project development, and that considering (and making clear to participants) how and when feedback will be given, will help to address unrealistic expectations and help to sustain participation. Making a contribution and an interest in background science (or computing) are the key motivating factors that attract people to online citizen science projects. Those who develop and run these projects show a good understanding of this, and position and promote their projects accordingly. Participation is sustained over time when participants become more deeply involved in the project community, making friends online and learning from each other, and from the project organisers. Those projects that contain technical features such as synchronous online chat, the opportunity to work with others, and to join teams, may have more of advantage in keeping participants engaged over time. The complexity of project task also has an influence on sustaining par.ticipation. Projects like Foldit that have a more difficult task encourage more co-operation and collaboration. This leads to strong community development that helps to keep some players involved for many years. However, this comes at a cost, as smaller numbers of participants are able to contribute on a more casual basis, or overcome the high barrier to participation, and lose interest. Creating a successful project requires a fine balance of what the project managers require in terms of support and input, with attracting and sustaining the participation of a critical mass of volunteers. Note 1. This is a small group of participants who have software skills and occa.sionally called upon to help the project developers test and de-bug the software. They are discussed in Chap. 2. References Batson, C. D., Ahmad, N., & Tsang, J.-A. (2002). Four motives for community involvement. Journal of Social Issues, 58(3), 429–445. https://doi. org/10.1111/1540-4560.00269. Clary, E. G., Snyder, M., Ridge, R. D., Copeland, J., Stukas, A. A., Haugen, J., & Miene, P. (1998). Understanding and assessing the motivations of volun.teers: A functional approach. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74(6), 1516–1530. Cox, J., Eun Young, O., Simmons, B., Graham, G., Anita, G., Lintott, C., Masters, K., & Woodcock, J. (2017). Doing good online: The changing rela.tionships between motivations, activity and retention among online volun.teers. Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly. http://eprints.whiterose.ac. uk/115831/. Hars, A., & Shaosong, O. (2002). Working for free? Motivations for participat.ing in open-source projects. International Journal of Electronic Commerce, 6(3), 25–39. Hertel, G., Niedner, S., & Herrmann, S. (2003). Motivation of software devel.opers in Open Source projects: An internet-based survey of contributors to the Linux kernel. Research Policy, 32, 1159–1177. Krebs, V. (2010). Motivations of cybervolunteers in an applied distributed com.puting environment: MalariaControl.net as an example. First Monday, 15(2). Lieberoth, A., Pedersen, M. K., Marin, A. C., Planke, T., & Sherson, J. F. (2014). Getting humans to do quantum optimization-user acquisition, engagement and early results from the citizen cyberscience game quantum moves. Human Computation, 1(2), 221–246. Oreg, S., & Nov, O. (2008). Exploring motivations for contributing to open source initiatives: The roles of contribution context and personal values. Computers in Human Behavior, 24, 2055–2073. Raddick, J., Bracey, G., Gay, P. L., Lintott, C. J., Murray, P., Schawinski, K., Szalay, A. S., & Vandenberg, J. (2010). Galaxy Zoo: Exploring the motivations of citizen science volunteers. Astronomy Education Review, 9(1). Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. (2000). Intrinsic and extrinsic motivations: Classic definitions and new directions. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 25, 54–67. Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. (2009). Promoting self-determined school engage.ment. Motivation, learning and well-being. In K. R. Wentzel & A. Wigfield (Eds.), Handbook on motivation at school. New York: Routledge. Tinati, R., Luczak-Roesch, M., Simperl, E., & Hall, W. (2017). An investiga.tion of player motivations in Eyewire, a gamified citizen science project. Computers in Human Behavior, 73, 527–540. 6 Divisions of Labour: Patterns of Participation and Contribution While online citizen science projects can have hundreds or thousands of registered participants, a much smaller number actually comprise the group of active participants who carry out most of the ‘work’. Some indi.viduals register with a project just out of curiosity, others carry out one or two classifications, and others may try one of the tutorial activities before drifting away. Those who regularly contribute and are committed to a project for a significant length of time are only a tiny fraction of those who show an initial interest. Clearly this has implications for project design, how projects are promoted, and their long-term sustainability. Active participation in online citizen science can be quantified in terms of how many minutes or hours a week someone contributes, or how many classifications one makes, but there are other dimensions to partici.pation. There may be additional tasks and roles, such as forum moderator or team coordinator, which broaden the range of what may be on offer to the citizen scientist beyond the main project task. I have used the three case studies to explore what kind of opportunities are available and con.sider what factors stimulate their development. I will also explore how participants become motivated to deepen their involvement, and how they view their own contribution to the projects. © The Author(s) 2018 V. Curtis, Online Citizen Science and the Widening of Academia, Palgrave Studies in Alternative Education, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-77664-4_6 Previous Work A few studies have previously explored patterns of participation in online citizen science. Most of these have examined Zooniverse projects and have observed what is known as a power-law or long tail distribution with a small number of high contributors, and a much greater number of casual participants. Some of these studies have also considered other ways in which the contribution of participants differs. A study of participants in Old Weather, a project that involves the transcription of archived Navy logs, refers to two different ‘types’ of par.ticipant: high contributors and low contributors – otherwise known as ‘dabblers’ (Eveleigh et al. 2014). High contributors are more engaged by the social and competitive features of the project, but make up a small percentage of the overall number of participants. Most participants con.tribute on a much smaller scale, ‘dabbling’ in the project often for a short period of time. Dabblers are less likely to participate in online discus.sions. High contributors, while only making up 6% of the project popu.lation, carried out 85% of the transcribing tasks. Nine ‘dabblers’ were interviewed and the investigators found that being able to dabble in a project is an attractive feature for some participants as it offers flexibility (participants can contribute when they have some free time), and gives individuals the chance to try out a project before they decide to commit further. Dabblers are also happy to work alone, and take part in the proj.ect for entertainment or diversion. The authors of the study also argue that in some cases, having a relatively high turnover of participants can be beneficial to a project, by increasing the accuracy of the task (e.g. through the ‘many eyes’ principle) and by also giving the impression of a vibrant project that may help to attract new participants. This study is of interest as it focuses on less active participants who are often more difficult to reach than active project participants, and there remains a gap in our understanding of the contribution (and motivations) of this sizeable group of citizen scientists. Another study examined the pattern of participation across ten Zooniverse projects and found that there was a small community of highly active users who, in addition to making contributions through the completion of the project tasks, also made the most contributions to the online discussions, and became a ‘core community’. A positive correla.tion was observed between the number of classifications made, and the number of postings on forum discussion areas. Others were referred to as ‘transient’ contributors (Tinati et al. 2014; Luczak-Rösch et al. 2014). Robinson et al. (2017) explored Plankton Portal and found that the top 10% of the project population (or ‘superusers’) had made 83% of the contributions. In a study on Galaxy Zoo and the Milky Way Project, Ponciano et al. (2014), grouped participants into five disctinct ‘engagement profiles’ based on the duration and intensity (the number of classifications com.pleted) of their involvement. ‘Hardworking’ participants work hard and regularly when arriving at a project, but don’t remain involved in the project for very long. ‘Spasmodic’ participants provide many classifica.tions over a short and irregular periods of time. ‘Persistent’ engagement involves a shorter number of classifcations over a longer duration of involvement in a project, and these volunteers may only participate for a few days in total. ‘Lasting’ engagement is similar to persistant engage.ment, only it takes place over a shorter duration, while ‘moderate’ engage.ment involved intermediate scores in both level and duration of contribution. The highest percentage of volunteers falls into the moder.ate category, while only a few individual volunteers exhibited persistent engagement. Moving on from the Zooniverse, the team of physicists who manage the citizen science game Quantum Moves has also noted a skewed level of participation (Lieberoth et al. 2014). They refer to their more active group of players as ‘heroes’, while participants who play for a while and then drop out are referred to as ‘flâneurs’. Quantum Moves has a rela.tively high threshold for participation, and the game may prove difficult for some. As observed in Foldit, the numbers of individuals completing successive game tutorials declines. This in itself influences patterns of par.ticipation and presents some issues in designing an interface which will appeal to those more committed players, yet also make it fun and appeal.ing for everyone. With regard to distributed computing projects, Darch and Carusi (2010) note the contribution of two main groups to climateprediction. net: ‘supercrunchers’ who do the bulk of the processing (and are most likely overclockers or computer hardware hobbyists), and ‘lay public’ who comprise about 80% of the participants but do about a quarter of the processing work. They also add a third, small group of ‘alpha testers’ who help to test new project software. A more qualitative approach to participation was examined in a distributed computing project (the BOINC Alliance Francophone) by Kloetzer et al. (2016). While explor.ing opportunities for informal learning, they observed that ‘core’ partici.pants take on other roles and responsibilities such as managing the forum, engaging with different ‘working groups’ within the project, software development, writing FAQs, and promoting the project. This group comprises the minority of total participants. Most (84%) of those ques.tioned as part of this particular study, had no other responsibilities within the project community. Patterns of Participation in Foldit, Folding@ home and Planet Hunters The concept of registered players vs active players, and the actual numbers involved in each of the projects, is outlined in Chap. 2. All three projects demonstrate a classic power-law distribution. Out of the three projects, Foldit has the greatest diversity of roles avail.able to the active participant. This is due mainly to the level of difficulty of the game, but is also the result of players having some degree of auton.omy over the way they organise themselves. The active playing popula.tion includes players who are playing at least 2–3 times a week and who interact regularly on real-time global chat while they are playing. Many active players also belong to the top-ranking Foldit teams. From this active playing community of approximately 300 individuals, there is a small group of dedicated ‘core’ players. These are the players who have been playing for several years and play daily. They frequently participate in online scientist’s and developer’s chats, get involved in reporting and fixing problems with the game, create content for the Foldit wiki, moder.ate the online global chat, manage teams, help to mentor and develop new players, and write many of the recipes (the coded automated sequences of moves). Some members of the core group have contributed to some of the key external scientific publications. These players are easily recognised by their usernames on global chat, the project forum, and the transcripts of developer’s and scientists’ chats, and their sustained appear.ance and contribution to Foldit can be documented and traced on the website. The core group numbers approximately 20 (a number corrobo.rated by several members of the Foldit development team). While not every player is proficient enough, or has the desire, to be in the core group, I observed seven different roles that can be played by active participants (Table 6.1). Some players may undertake more than one of these roles. The diversity of roles emerging in Foldit is a product of the complexity of the task. Foldit is a very difficult game to learn, and there are a number of different approaches to playing. The small community of active play.ers have developed these roles over a number of years, and undoubtedly, this has contributed to the quality of research outcomes and publica.tions. Participants have the freedom to choose how they participate, and there is also scope to influence the direction of the game. The develop.ment of recipes and the input of those with software expertise are just two examples. Having a range of roles and activities within the game keeps it interesting and helps to sustain participation over many years (some participants have been with Foldit since it began in 2008). The fact that Foldit has a synchronous chat function may have helped to facilitate the development of these different roles. Communication is much more immediate, and new ideas, such as the use of recipes, can spread among the community quickly. Moderating the chat in real-time, can be challenging (trolling and deliberate disruption occur from time to time), but it is key to the success of the project and helps to facilitate learning and collaboration. Folding@home also has other roles available for those with certain technical skills, and for those who are overclockers and computer hard.ware enthusiasts. Within the overclocking communities, individuals can act as team leaders and moderators, while others can help new partici.pants. Those with experience in software can be invited to join the Beta Testers and help to develop new project software, or fix bugs. More com.mitted participants can also become forum moderators, help to co.ordinate one of the teams, or help to translate web pages into other languages. Not all participants will have these opportunities, unless they have (or develop) the required skill-set. For many participants, their involvement consists of running the project software and perhaps reading some of the background material prepared on the science of protein fold.ing. This pattern of participation in Folding@home, that is, the division between overclockers and a more ‘lay’ less technically proficient partici.pant is similar to that observed in climateprediction.net (Darch and Carusi 2010). Planet Hunters has less diversity in the roles that are available for par.ticipants. This is likely due to the fact that the project task is relatively straightforward and can be carried out in isolation as and when the par.ticipant has the time or inclination. The lack of a real-time chat or dynamic project forum means that there is less opportunity for interac.tion and discussion. This is further compounded by an absence of teams, or competitive dimension which can help to promote interaction and foster online communities. However, participants can become forum moderators (this is true of all projects in the Zooniverse), and can help with the translation of project pages into other languages. Observations of these three projects suggest that the more complex the task, the more opportunities arise for different roles. These roles are reli.ant to some extent on the existence of an adequate vehicle for communi.cation, particularly one that enables real-time communication. Such communication fosters the development of a project community and allows the spread of new ideas and novel approaches to the project task. A competitive element and/or a complex project task may stimulate the evolution of different participant roles. This availability of different roles may appeal to some participants, particularly those whose sustained par.ticipation is motivated by social interaction with other players or with developing skills (this is certainly the case with Foldit players and for some Folding@home overclockers). Indeed those who branch out into different project roles undoubtedly have different motivations for partici.pation, than those who contribute more lightly. Feedback from partici.pants relating to motivation (covered in Chap. 5) suggests that more involved participation is motivated by the enjoyment of the intellectual challenge of the project task, and by the enjoyment derived by collaborat.ing with others. Modelling Contribution: Reader-to-Leader and Beyond The pattern of unequal participation observed in many online citizen sci.ence projects (and indeed other online contributory projects) has been referred to as the ’90-9-1 Principle’. This rule states that only 1% of inter-net users generate new content, 9% will edit this content in some way, while the remaining 90% are ‘lurkers’ and just digest or read this content (Cooper 2013). This pattern has been observed in Wikipedia, YouTube and open mapping projects such as OpenStreetMap (Budhathoki and Haythornthwaite 2013). Whether online citizen science projects actually conform to the 90-9-1 pattern is not easy to ascertain, as it is sometimes difficult to accurately determine the total number of participants. While such a rule can help to describe the greater proportion of relatively inac.tive participants in online citizen science compared with smaller propor.tion of those who are active contributors, they don’t necessarily explain the diversity of roles and specialisms that can develop amongst groups of more active participants. Patterns of contribution have been explored in detail in relation to other online communities. Some users make a transition from providing content to editing content (Brake 2013; Ciffolilli 2003), while some con.tributors move beyond this role and become collaborators forming connected networks with others with a particular focus (e.g. a Wikipedia article, or an online game wiki). Of this group of participants, an even smaller number of participants may become involved in activities such as helping novices, or establishing and enforcing community policies (Brandtzaeg and Heim 2009; Kittur et al. 2007; Makriyanni and De Liddo 2010). This progression of online participation has been described in more detail by Preece and Schneiderman in their ‘reader-to leader’ framework (Fig. 6.1), and it describes the journey that some individuals make from merely reading content, to contributing their own content, and then on to collaborating with others to produce content. Such a ‘collaborator’ may eventually become a ‘leader’ of the community helping to establish the rules and norms of the group. While the number of ‘readers’ may be great, the number of individuals decreases with each successive stage and with increasing involvement and responsibility (Preece and Shneiderman 2009). This framework goes beyond a quantitative description of how much (or how often) a participant contributes, and considers the nature of the tasks at each stage. This framework may be useful when considering the pattern of partici.pation in online citizen science and the movement between different lev.els of involvement. One of its key features is that users don’t always progress from one stage to another, and that there can be movement in both directions between the different levels of participation. Similar observations have been made in this research in relation to the Foldit, Folding@home and Planet Hunters. For example, in Planet Hunters and Foldit, contribution can wax and wane as participants may not partici.pate for a while but become more involved when they have free time. An alternative framework for exploring patterns of contribution in online citizen science projects can be found in the work of Haythornthwaite (2009) who has examined peer production communi.ties such as wikipedia, distributed computing, and the academic com.munity in detail, and describes contributory behaviours as either ‘lightweight’ or ‘heavyweight’, and carried out by either ‘crowds’ or ‘communities’ (Table 6.2). In lightweight peer production, individuals can easily contribute, and there is usually a large set of participants (the crowd) who provide minimal additions to the endeavour as a whole. The ‘rules’ of contribution are defined by authorities or owners of such proj.Table 6.2 Main features of lightweight and heavyweight peer production (Haythornthwaite 2009) Light Heavy Contribution type, granularity and authentication Atomistic, independent Addressing uncertainty, explicit knowledge Rule-based contribution Delimited contribution attributes Single form defined by authority / owner Pooled interdependence Individual to group focus Anonymous History of contribution unnecessary Open membership, low threshold to entry Two-tier hierarchy: authority and contributor Independent, repetitive , discrete contributions Recognition, reputation, reward Quantitative recognition mechanism Internally relevant to the individual application or the arena of contribution Quantitative measures of contribution to product Connected, revised, negotiated Addressing equivocality, tacit knowledge Negotiated contribution Variable contribution attributes Multiple forms defined by and authenticated by group consensus, norms Reciprocal interdependence Attributed History of contribution important for group Review, gatekeeping to join, high effort for membership Multi-tier hierarchy: novice to expert, newbie to experienced Continuing, contingent, norms-based contribution to product and process Qualitative recognition Internally relevant, permeable to field of interest Internal: judgements of contribution quality, expertise re field of interest Peer review judgements of contribution to products and process ects, and participants are not expected to play a role in determining the direction or the project as a whole. Participants do not need to make long-term contributions, nor do they need to interact with others. They are free to dip in and out when time or inclination allows. Haythornthwaite uses distributed computing projects as an example of lightweight peer production – although this would apply only to the less active partici.pants, and not necessarily to members of the associated overclocking communities. This pattern of participation can be more readily observed in the dabblers of the Zooniverse. In heavyweight peer production success depends upon a critical mass of contributors (the community) who make significant time investments to the project and who interact with other participants in order to sustain the community. There are learned norms of interaction and language which are indicative of community membership. Outsiders or novices can be easily identified. In some cases, the participants determine the goals of the project. Haythornthwaite uses the academic community as an example of heavyweight peer production. This pattern of participation can be seen in the core group within Foldit and within some of the over-clocking communities, and the Beta Testers of Folding@home. While some endeavours can clearly be defined as either lightweight or heavyweight, there are some examples where there is some overlap. For example, Wikipedia demonstrates both lightweight behaviour from the crowds who edit and update articles, and heavyweight behaviour from the small community of editors who act as gatekeepers and decide which articles remain. Table 6.2 outlines the main features of lightweight and heavyweight peer production. This framework appears to be relevant to some aspects of online citizen science as it encompasses a range of tasks and behaviours, some of which are readily observed in a number of projects. It also affords some flexibil.ity as projects may exhibit characteristics of both lightweight and heavy.weight behaviours, which may be relevant to specific project tasks. However, online citizen science may not conform to either of these models entirely, and it may be better described by a different approach that is based directly on observations and findings from a range of proj.ects (Fig. 6.2). Each project has a large number of registered users, in effect, the poten.tial pool of contributors. From this group of registered users, a smaller number make limited number of contributions, or contribute for a short period of time – these are ‘transient participants’ or ‘dabblers’. They con.tribute on a more ad hoc, or casual basis, spending short amounts of time on a project task when they have the time and inclination. Evidence from the surveys, interview feedback, as well as my own experience of partici.pation, suggest that individuals in this group are less likely to interact with other participants (or project scientists), or get involved in other project roles. From the population of registered users, a smaller number of active participants will become interested in the project and may be more intrinsically motivated to participate on a regular basis, and perhaps over a longer period of time. These individuals are more likely to become involved in the social aspects of the project, and in other project roles. The active playing community in Foldit is an example of this type of contribution. This group of active participants may show this level of commitment from the beginning of their involvement in a project, or they emerge from the group of more casual participants. Conversely, active participants may reduce their level of contribution and move to the group of more transient participants. This is illustrated on Fig. 6.2 as a ‘transition zone’ and illustrates that there can be some movement between these two groups of participants. Several Planet Hunters participants who were interviewed spoke of varying their involvement in the projects based on the amount of free time they had available. Out of the group of active participants, will emerge a smaller number of core participants. These citizen scientists are more likely to interact with each other and with members of the project team. They may work together either co-operatively or collaboratively. Core participants are more likely to get involved in other project-related tasks such as moderat.ing forums, or mentoring new participants. They are not likely to emerge from the group of transient participants or ‘dabblers’, as they require an in-depth knowledge of the project and the related tasks, something that is more likely to be acquired during active participation. The number of core participants can be quite small, yet they do much of the ‘work’. This observation suggests that some projects do not require a huge number of participants to be successful or sustainable. However, in the case of Foldit, the level of difficulty involved (and the persistence required to master the game), requires that the project organisers cast their net far and wide in order to find this select group of participants. One thing that should be emphasised is that while different levels of contribution may exist, as well as different ways to contribute, some indi.viduals will be quite happy to remain as more casual participants or dab.blers. Not everyone has the inclination, time, or in some cases, the skills to be a core participant. This was especially evident in the feedback from Planet Hunter participants, and many liked the fact that they could dip into the project when they had the time. Indeed, one of the Planet Hunters scientists made the point that both types of participant need to be catered for, the dabbler and more committed, and this may well prove to be one of the more challenging aspects of working with diverse groups of volunteers. How Do Project Scientists and Developers Contribute? Scientists and developers who are involved in managing online citizen science projects also have differing views in relation to how they should be contributing to a project in addition to utilising the data that is gener.ated as a result (and not wasting anybody’s time). Project team members view their contribution in terms of the respon.sibilities it entails, and how well they achieve their goals. All of those interviewed stated that their main role was to ensure that valid and high quality scientific research was being carried out. The Planet Hunters sci.entists were keen to stress that they should not be wasting anybody’s time, and that they had an obligation to produce something meaningful from the efforts of volunteers. The developers of Foldit also spoke about their efforts to produce an entertaining game that would appeal to cur.rent and potential participants. The ‘quality’ of their efforts was linked to the number of scientific publications produced. Such comments not only reflect their views concerning their contribution to a project, but are also a reflection of the primary motivation for their involvement, which is to carry out and produce valid and useful scientific research. In addition to diversity in roles available to citizen scientists, inter.views with scientists and developers suggest that there are a number of ways that members of the project team can contribute to online citizen science projects, although their main contribution is their scientific and technical expertise. Project scientists set the research parameters, decide the research questions and utilise the output of the projects. Online citi.zen science projects also require the input of software developers, games developers, and website designers. Indeed, the technological input into these projects is of great importance, and contributes greatly to the poten.tial success of a project (Prestopnik and Crowston 2012). Project team members must also promote and communicate about the projects in order to recruit more participants. Thus, scientists and devel.opers can also contribute by participating in these public relations efforts. From interviews with project teams, and through participant-observation, it appears that the degree to which this occurs can vary greatly. Some project scientists and developers are very active in talking to external audiences and promote their projects at academic conferences or to jour.nalists (e.g. Foldit, Zooniverse projects). Some appear to rely more on ‘word of mouth’ (Folding@home), and their involvement in promotion is on a much smaller scale. Members of the project team can also make a contribution through their interaction and engagement with members of the community of citizen scientists. Some participants are very interested in the science behind the project and some report enjoying the interaction they have with professional scientists. The extent to which this interaction takes place can vary tremendously. Some project team members greatly enjoy this aspect of their involvement in online citizen science, while for others, it can be more challenging. The degree to which various members of a project team are embedded within the community of participants varies. Some believe it is their responsibility to take an active role, answering questions, providing feed.back and taking suggestions from citizen scientists on board. Some remain less involved, and give forum moderators or members of the core community greater responsibility for managing the community of par.ticipants. The relationship between citizen scientist and professional sci.entist (or developer) is in many ways, most strongly influenced by the nature of the project task. Where it is relatively challenging, this can cre.ate an environment that permits more open collaboration with citizen scientists. Foldit provides the clearest example of this. Players have been involved in the development of the project from the beginning, and the project team regularly consults with the core group of players. The poten.tial of online citizen science is best realised when this collaboration is fostered, and online ‘communities of practice’ involving both specialists and non-specialists are allowed to develop and flourish. How Do Participants View Their Contribution? A further aspect of participation, which has been little explored, is how participants (both citizen and professional scientists) view their contribu.tion and involvement in online citizen science projects. For example, do citizen scientists feel they are actively involved in scientific research? Do participants view themselves as dabblers, collaborators or leaders (or per.haps, none of these things)? Perhaps they see themselves as ‘heroes’ and ‘flâneurs’? Project participants in Foldit, Folding@home and Planet Hunters were asked in the survey how they saw their own contribution to the project. Some of the key issues raised were followed up during the interviews with both citizen scientists and professional scientists. Among Folding@home participants over a third of survey respondents do indeed feel as though they are involved in scientific research – particu.larly if they have been participating in the project for a number of years, or if they (or their team) have accumulated a lot of points. While some respondents feel unequivocal about their involvement in scientific research, about a fifth of respondents described it as very small when viewed within the wider context of a project in which many thousands of individuals are contributing. Twenty-eight (from a total of 407) respon.dents described their role in Folding@home as a supporting one, and made a clear distinction between actually doing the research and enabling it or facilitating it. Approximately 15% of respondents made the distinction between actually being directly involved in scientific research, and just making a contribution or donation. This group of respondents feel that they are merely donating their computing resources, and liken their involvement to making a cash donation to a charity. Approximately 11% of respon.dents felt they were not really involved in scientific research and many of the respondents within this group did not connect what they were doing with their computers with the process of doing scientific research. The fact that some did not make the connection between what they were doing and scientific research is interesting, and was further sup.ported by some of the interviews of participants who were overclockers. As distributed computing projects are used to benchmark the processing power of custom built computers, it is perhaps unsurprising that the sci.ence behind the chosen project is not a consideration. Several of those interviewed stated that they really didn’t know much about the project when they started, and that their involvement was directly related to their hobby. However, once these individuals became more knowledgeable about the project and its aims, they became more motivated by an oppor.tunity to make a meaningful contribution to medical research, and car.ried on donating their processing power to Folding@home. The Folding@home project team refers to participants as ‘donors’, and there is generally little or no reference to Folding@home participants in the publications that are based on the project outputs. This may reinforce the view of some participants that they are merely donating a computing resource rather than involved in scientific research. However, this is not to say that their efforts aren’t valued, they clearly are, and this was articu.lated by members of the project team that I interviewed. The effort of participants over the years has enabled an incredibly high number of publications. However, the approach taken by the Folding@home team is in stark contrast to that of the Zooniverse project team who make a concerted effort to mention the contribution of Zooites in their publica.tions, with some papers providing a link to a list of the many thousands of participants (regardless of their level of contribution). The attitude of the project team can impact on the way participants feel about their contribution. The controversy surrounding the change in the Folding@home points system was brought up by some of those interviewed. These respondents generally felt that changes were made without any consultation with the community, and they felt underval.ued as a result. …whenever change occurs in the project, how the change affects users are not really the primary focus. I would argue that too many people end up feeling badly about their donation. They feel that they are not valued and end up quit.ting and bad mouthing the whole project. (F@H 2) The reaction to the proposed changes highlights the importance of making participants feel that their contributions are valued and that their involvement is meaningful. Those who took part in the Planet Hunters survey were asked ‘How would you describe your contribution to Planet Hunters? Do you feel as though you are involved in scientific research?’ All respondents provided an answer to this question and most (82%) felt they were involved in scientific research to some degree. For the majority of these respondents this contribution was felt to be quite small. However, there was a sense of respondents feeling part of a wider, and useful, group effort. Seven of the respondents had been directly involved in the discovery of a new extra-solar planet. Not surprisingly, a great deal of pride and accomplishment was articulated by these participants. For most of the respondents however, Planet Hunters does not neces.sarily make them feel at the forefront of scientific research, but more as helpers. One respondent likened the role of participants to lab assistants. Some made the differentiation between the analysis of light curves by citizen scientists, and the further evaluation of that data by professional scientists. As many in this group had a formal education in a STEM subject, this may reflect their knowledge and beliefs about what actually constitutes science and scientific research (i.e. basic classification tasks are not as important as more in-depth analyses). The project managers of Planet Hunters (and the other projects in the Zooniverse) consistently refer to participants as ‘collaborators’ and this was raised by two of Planet Hunters scientists that I spoke to, and the fact that this was their role demanded that time and effort be invested in com.municating with them. I think you need to remember that you are dealing with people. These are not machines, and one of the things you have to recognise is you have to deal with that, and acknowledge and treat them as collaborators. I think it’s very impor.tant to bring them along on the ride. (PH Team 2) Interviews with Foldit players shed some light on how they viewed their contribution and wider role with the project. Most respondents felt that the project team was responsible for the overall co-ordination of the project, to supply participants with new puzzles, and to make sure the efforts of the players have some useful application. Among the play.ers interviewed, there are differing views on individual contribution, as well as differences of opinion regarding whether participating in Foldit constitutes carrying out scientific research. Most of the interviewees clearly felt that they were contributing, and were indeed, participating in scientific research. It does feel like I’m contributing to “SCIENCE”! Even if the details are a little nebulous. (FD 9) I feel like I’m doing core uncredentialed science when I’m doing Foldit, which I strongly feel is a valuable adjunct to science done by trained scientists. (FD 4) One interviewee described the role of Foldit players as similar to that of other ‘support staff’. We play a part. I don’t think we are doing science….it became scientific when it is analysed and prove to be true or useful by scientific methods. We help sci.entists to solve a problem like many other technicians useful in scientific research: the one who makes the instruments or takes care of animals in a lab for example or the communication team…all these people are useful parts of the scientific work but are not scientists. (FD 5) The idea that citizen scientists can have a function analogous to that of paid support staff is of interest. The number of hours that some Foldit participants invest in the project may well be similar to that of paid sup.port staff. Others were less sure about their contribution to science, par.ticularly those who weren’t among the top twenty ranking players. This also raises another interesting point: are all contributions equal when it comes to the scientific output of a project? I certainly had doubts about the value of my own contribution in Foldit, given that I was seldom a top performer in any of the science puzzles. If one is unsure of the value of their contribution, it can be de-motivating. Such a participant is unlikely to remain committed to a project for any considerable length of time. Regardless of the degree to which interviewees felt they were ‘doing’ scientific research, some used language that is associated with scientific methodology and speak of developing and testing their “theories and assumptions”; “theorycrafting” with other players; and suggesting direc.tions that the project may take. Many also confidently use technical terms associated with the science of protein biochemistry, and are able to hold productive and well-informed discussions with members of the Foldit team. One interviewee took exception to Foldit being called a game, and felt that it trivialised the efforts of the participants. Folding is work, hard work, NOT gameplay…I am involved in scientific research. I approach it as such. If this really was just a game I would stop today and dedicate my intellect, time, money and determination to a more worthy cause. (FD 8) Packaging a scientific research problem as an online game may not be without its problems, and the potential ‘conflict’ between co-operation and competition may be an important consequence of this approach to online citizen science. This is encapsulated in the feedback of one of the interviewees who made the distinction between what he perceived as dif.ferent types of contribution. Those made by ‘gamers’ who are motivated by score and rank and other, more worthy types of participants who are motivated by the scientific goals of the project. The members of the Foldit team that I interviewed stressed that the community of players is crucial to the success of the project. One of the advantages of opening this research up to the wider community is that it fosters diversity in the approach to the protein puzzles, which is highly valued. Participants bring different skills and problem solving experience to the game which has been beneficial to the scientists at the Baker Lab. One of the developers stated that it is this diversity that has helped the game to advance scientific research. Feedback from participants from across the three projects shows that individuals can have quite different views about their own contribution. Some feel closely connected to the research that is carried out by project scientists, while others see their input as smaller, less significant, but part of a much wider endeavour. Citizen scientists regard their own participa.tion in terms of the perceived value and utility of their contribution. As a result, it is important for them to feel valued by project scientists and acknowledged in some way, whether that is being mentioned in scientific publications, or consulted about major changes to the project (such as the system for awarding points). The results of previous work and this research on Foldit, Folding@ home and Planet Hunters participants illustrates that participation can be considered from both a quantitative perspective (quantity and dura.tion of contribution) and from a more qualitative perspective (the range and diversification of project tasks). The work in this area has consistently shown that small groups of more active and dedicated participants carry out the majority of the tasks. Furthermore, those participants who are active are more likely to diversify and take on other project roles – espe.cially if the project task is complex and if the design of the project inter.face facilitates this diversification. A number of models have been outlined that help to characterise and illustrate the nature of participation in online citizen science projects. Although direct feedback from partici.pants from the three projects suggests that there is some variation in the way an individual participant perceives his or her own contribution. Some view their contribution as a small drop in the bucket, while others feel that they are integral to the success of the project. Interesting differ.ences in the attitudes of professional scientists towards citizen scientists have surfaced, and highlight the fact that whatever the level of contribu.tion, participants like to know that their efforts are appreciated. References Brake, D. R. (2013). Are we all online content creators now? Web 2.0 and digi.tal divides. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 19, 591–609. Brandtzaeg, P. B., & Heim, J. (2009). Explaining participation in online com.munities. In B. Whitworth & A. de Moor (Eds.), Handbook of research on socio-technnical design and social networking systems (pp. 167–182). Hershey: Information Science Reference. Budhathoki, N. R., & Haythornthwaite, C. (2013). Motivation for open collabo.ration: Crowd and community models and the case of OpenStreetMap. American Behavioral Scientist, 57(5), 548–575. https://doi.org/10.1177/ 0002764212469364. Ciffolilli, A. (2003). Phantom authority, self-selected recruitment and retention of members in virtual communities: The case of Wikipedia. First Monday, 8(12). http://firstmonday.org/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index.php/fm/article/ view/1108/1028. Cooper, C. (2013). Zen in the art of citizen science: Apps for collective discov.ery and the 1 percent rule of the web. In Scientific American. Darch, P., & Carusi, A. (2010). Retaining volunteers in volunteer computing projects. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 368(1926), 4177–4192. Eveleigh, A., Jennett, C., Blandford, A., Brohan, P., & Cox, A. L. (2014). Designing for dabblers and deterring drop-outs in citizen science. Paper read at Proceedings of the 32nd annual ACM conference on Human factors in computing systems. Haythornthwaite, C. (2009). Crowds and communities: Light and heavyweight models of peer production. Paper read at Hawaii International Conference On Systems Science, at Big Island, Hawaii. Kittur, A., Ed, C., Pendleton, B. A., Suh, B., & Mytkowicz, T. (2007). Power of the few vs. wisdom of the crowd: Wikipedia and the rise of the bourgeoisie. World Wide Web, 1(2), 19. Kloetzer, L., Schneider, D., & Da Costa, J. (2016). Not so passive: Engagement and learning in volunteer computing projects. Human Computation, 3, 25–68. Lieberoth, A., Pedersen, M. K., Marin, A. C., Planke, T., & Sherson, J. F. (2014). Getting humans to do quantum optimization-user acquisition, engagement and early results from the citizen cyberscience game quantum moves. Human Computation, 1(2), 221–246. Luczak-Rösch, M., Tinati, R., Simperl, E., Van Kleek, M., Shadbolt, N., & Simpson, R.. 2014. Why won’t aliens talk to us? Content and community dynamics in online citizen science. In Eighth International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media. Ann Arbor. Makriyanni, E., & De Liddo, A. (2010). “Fairy rings” of participation: the invis.ible network influencing participation in online communities. In L. Dirckinck-Holmfield, V. Hodgson, C. Jones, M. de Laat, D. McConnell, & T. Ryberg (Eds.), Proceedings of the 7th international conference on net.worked learning (pp. 285–292). Lancaster: Lancaster University. Ponciano, L., Brasileiro, F., Simpson, R., & Smith, A. (2014). Volunteers’ engagement in human computation for astronomy projects. Computing in Science & Engineering, 16(6), 52–59. Preece, J., & Shneiderman, B. (2009). The reader-to-leader framework: Motivating technology-mediated social participation. AIS Transactions on Human-Computer Interaction, 1(1), 13–32. Prestopnik, N.R., & Crowston, K.. (2012). Citizen science system assemblages: Understanding the technologies that support crowdsourced science. In iCon.ference ’12. Toronto: ACM. Robinson, K. L., Luo, J. Y., Sponaugle, S., Guigand, C., & Cowen, R. (2017, April). A tale of two crowds: Public engagement in plankton classification. Frontiers in Marine Science, 4, Article 82. Tinati, R., Simperl, E., Luczak-Rösch, M., Van Kleek, M., & Shadbolt, N. (2014). Collective intelligence in citizen science–A study of performers and talkers. In  Collective Intelligence, Boston, June 10–12, 2014. 7 Participant Interaction: From Online Forums to Virtual Communities of Practice Online citizen science has produced some remarkable examples of col.laboration between citizen scientists and professional scientists, and also among small groups of citizen scientists – sometimes quite independently of the scientists and developers who manage the projects. Whether col.laborations develop appears to be heavily influenced by the nature of the project task (particularly the level of difficulty), and by technical param.eters of the project including facilities for communication between par.ticipants, opportunities for learning, and whether there is an element of competition. Interaction between participants not only contributes to the creation of new scientific knowledge, but also helps sustain involve.ment by creating an enjoyable and meaningful experience for those who take part. Under the right conditions, these groups can develop into com.munities of practice. Communities of practice is a term that was first coined by the anthro.pologist Jean Lave and the educational theorist Etienne Wenger in rela.tion to their research on skilled trades such as midwives, tailors and butchers (Lave and Wenger 1991). Their work describes the process of development from newcomer to an accomplished insider as individual community members become more familiar with the tasks and practices © The Author(s) 2018 V. Curtis, Online Citizen Science and the Widening of Academia, Palgrave Studies in Alternative Education, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-77664-4_7 of that community. Less experienced members of a community watch and learn from those who are more proficient and gradually become involved in a wider range of tasks. This type of learning through observ.ing and practice is called legitimate peripheral participation. In a commu.nity of practice, joint sense-making and problem solving enhances the formation of interpersonal ties. Members, or practitioners, develop a shared repertoire of resources, experiences, tools and other ways of addressing problems and issues that are unique to that community. Over the past decade or so, further thinking about communities of practice has extended to include online communities and interactions (Hanson-Smith 2013; Makriyanni and De Liddo 2010). Online interac.tion through forums and real-time communication can help to create specialised project communities, and provide opportunities for learning. While some previous work has considered communities of open-source software writers or groups of Wikipedia editors (Zeitlyn 2003; Pentzold 2011), little consideration has been given to communities of online citi.zen scientists. This chapter explores previous research in this area, and looks in depth at the project communities in Foldit, Folding@home and Planet Hunters and considers how these project communities have evolved and what conditions promote opportunities for learning, col.laboration, and the development of communities of practice. Online Interaction Observations of online citizen science projects have shown that interac.tion between participants usually occurs through asynchronous online forums, or (less commonly) via synchronous internet chat. Project blogs written by scientists can also provide a venue for interaction between the project scientists and the citizen scientists, and participants are sometimes able to comment on new posts and ask those who are more experienced (or project scientists) questions relating to the project task, or about the project more generally. Participants also use them as tools to interact more generally with each other about a wide range of subjects, and this can lead to the development of online friendships and peer groups. Some previous research has shown that participating in online com.munities and interacting with other participants is an important motiva.tor for some participants in online citizen science projects (Holohan 2013; Raddick et al. 2013). Jennett et al. (2013) refer to ‘sociability’ in online citizen science, and suggest that some participants are motivated to take part because of the social interaction with other participants or with scientists. They state that this interaction may help foster feelings of community identity and belonging, and that there is potential for many different types of sociability to develop given the right project platform. This has been observed in distributed computing projects by Kloetzer et al. (2016). As the computers of participants are doing much of the work, there is time to engage socially with the project community. Much of this is focused on the competitive aspect of DC and with core partici.pants working closely with fellow team members to maximise their com.puting output. Such interaction also results in informal learning about the related science and software, and also developing community man.agement skills and leadership skills. Holohan and Garg (2005) explored interaction between participants within two distributed computing projects (SETI@home and the Great Internet Mersenne Prime Search). Through surveys and interviews with participants, they found that social interaction with other participants was one of the most important aspects of involvement and a strong moti.vator for over half of respondents. They also explored the sense of iden.tity that was created through participation in the project community, but also the identity generated in relation to team membership. Interactions were stronger within the various project teams as participants worked together to generate the most points and improve their ranking on the project leader board. They also note the existence of a core group who help the less skilled members of the community by bringing them up to their level of knowledge, providing an example of legitimate peripheral participation. While interaction between project participants may generate sociabil.ity it may also form the basis for co-operation or collaboration between participants. Co-operation and collaboration are two distinct processes. The main difference is whether the tasks are divided up and individually completed (co-operation), or whether they are completed together through dialogue and shared cognitive processes (collaboration). Co-operation involves a division of labour and possibly task specialisa.tion, with individuals taking responsibility for their part of the final product. In contrast, collaboration is a co-ordinated, synchronous activ.ity, in which there is a shared concept of a problem and a process of shared creation (Dillenbourg 1999; Paulus 2005). Co-operation and collaboration play an important role in learning and in the creation of new knowledge. Online citizen science projects are often referred to as ‘collaborations’ between citizen and professional sci.entist, although there is often little evidence that meaningful collabora.tion is actually taking place. The use of the words ‘collaboration’ and ‘collaborators’ seems to be more about project managers articulating the value they place on the contributions of citizen scientists. Co-operation appears to be more commonplace as participants are usually assigned spe.cific project tasks. While there are many opportunities to interact with others taking part in an online citizen science project, there is little information relating to what proportion of participants take part in these interactions. There is also little research that characterises the nature of this interaction, or explores the extent to which co-operation and collaboration takes place. This research on Foldit, Folding@home and Planet Hunters has explored interaction between participants in greater detail. Data from surveys, interviews and participant observation was gathered relating to who takes part in online interaction, how they interact and why they interact. Opportunities for Online Interaction in Foldit, Folding@home and Planet Hunters Of the three projects, Foldit players reported (via the survey) the greatest level of involvement in the online project community with most (84%) reporting regular interaction with other players mainly via the synchro.nous chat facility. The strength of the Foldit community is one of the most striking features of the project and many Foldit players (both on the survey and during the interviews) spoke about the community with pride and warmth, highlighting the importance of this social dimension of their participation. Players talked about the friendships they had made online and with fellow team mates. One player referred to his team as his “folding family”. General levels of interaction between Foldit players are greatly enhanced by the presence of a synchronous ‘global’ chat window that appears during gameplay which gives interaction an immediacy that cannot be replicated on forum discussion threads. The global chat also allows players to take a screenshot of the puzzle they are currently work.ing on and share it with other players in order to get help and advice. In Folding@home, approximately 80% of survey respondents stated that they read or posted in forums relating to the project. This feedback related both the official project forum and forums set up by teams of overclockers and hardware enthusiasts. During the interviews, the sub-communities within the Folding@home sample, the overclockers and the Beta Testers, also reported regular use of online forums to discuss issues relating to their involvement in the project. Similarly to Foldit, com.ments were made by members of the overclocking community and the Beta Testers in Folding@home about making friends online, and about the enjoyment of working with others to solve technical problems. By comparison, a much smaller proportion of Planet Hunter survey respondents took part in online discussions, and most tend to work alone while carrying out the project task. Approximately half reported reading content on the online discussion boards or Talk function, but only 25 respondents (about one fifth) had ever posted content. Data provided by one of the project scientists on the number of Talk comments posted sug.gests that nearly a third of the total number of comments made have been posted by only 48 different individuals (Raddick 2013). Compared with the synchronous global chat in Foldit, the Planet Hunters discussion boards do not have the same immediacy. The Planet Hunter discussion boards also felt much slower than the overclocker forums that I observed, which appeared to have a relatively rapid response rate as well as a lively dynamic, despite being asynchronous. My experience of Planet Hunters was that responses to comments on the discussion board and responses posted on Talk could take a long time. Sometimes if felt as though not many other participants were out there. A study of Zooniverse discussion boards has shown that responses to comments can take many hours (or days), and that this can affect the vibrancy of a community and how it is perceived by new participants (Luczak-Rösch et al. 2014). This lack of pace can make asynchronous online communication less dynamic (James and Busher 2009). The absence of interaction between Planet Hunters participants was also apparent in the interview feedback. A number of comments made refer.ence to the community, or rather the lack of it, compared with other Zooniverse projects. The time I want interaction is when I find an image I can’t figure out in the way desired. There are facilities for this on the sites but they are a bit cumber.some. They do not lead to group analysis really. (PH 4) From my experience of playing Foldit, internet chat is a key facilitator of online communication between players. Not only does it play a role in facilitating cooperation and collaboration between players, but it is also important for the formation of online friendships, and more general socia.bility. Synchronous internet chat has also been used by members of the Beta Testers on Folding@home who collaborate with each other, and with software engineers employed by the project team, to address a particular technical problem. One of the Beta Testers I interviewed was incredibly positive about this experience, and made him feel that he was making an important contribution to the project. The lack of synchronous internet chat on Planet Hunters, and the lack of a ‘quick turnaround’ of responses to online posts influences online interaction. The project can feel less dynamic and immediate than other projects on the Zooniverse (and proj.ects like Foldit or Eyewire), and it is likely that this limits the number of participants who are motivated to interact. Participant observation and the feedback from surveys and interviews indicate that the level of interaction between participants is related to the project task and certain aspects of project design. A high level of task complexity means that participants interact with other more experienced members of the community if they want to actively contribute to a proj.ect. This occurs when new participants are learning about the project task, and when participants work together on the task. Examples of legitimate peripheral participation were observed (and directly experi.enced) in Foldit and to a lesser extent among overclockers and members of the Folding@home Beta Testers as they worked together to address specific hardware and software issues. The presence of teams and a competitive element also has an effect on interaction between participants. In Foldit and Folding@home teams bring participants together to work on a specific project task, or to com.pete against other teams. Over time they can also develop their own sense of identity. Teams have their own webpages, some have their own inter-net chat channel where they work together in real-time, and some even have their own mission statements. For example the mission statement of Anthropic Dreams, one of the oldest teams on Foldit, states: We’re here to help you become the best Foldit player that you can be! By working with each other, we hope to be an important part of helping science to help all. Teams on Foldit and Folding@home also have some independence from the project organisers (and perhaps more freedom), which may affect the dynamics and content of this interaction. The lack of team, or any element of competition in Planet Hunters, reduces the opportunities for participants to come together, and interaction is limited to the Talk function, discussion board and the project blog, all of which are overseen by the project managers and a small number of moderators. Interaction Between Project Team Members and Citizen Scientists The avenues used for communication (e.g. blog, forum, internet chat) and the degree to which members of the project team are ‘embedded’ and have a regular presence within the community varies between projects. However, the prevalence of more one-way communication from project scientists to citizen scientist (particularly in Folding@home and Planet Hunters) reflects the fact that all three projects were initially organised in a top-down fashion, and that volunteers were not directly involved in setting up the project or formulating the research questions. Most online citizen science projects appear to have been set up in this way, in contrast to projects that are initiated by citizens who may be concerned about a local environmental issue (Irwin 1995). In Folding@home, there is some interaction between members of the project team and those in the Beta Testers. However, there were a number of points made on the online survey and during the interviews that out.lined a general desire for greater communication with the project team, particularly for greater visibility of the project scientists and more infor.mation about how the outputs of the project were being used. Inevitably, some of the publications based on Folding@home will be behind a pay-wall, and will be in a format (and use language) that is not easily accessi.ble to the non-specialist reader. However, blog posts and summaries on the website do go some way to explaining the science behind Folding@ home. The controversy surrounding the changes to the points system highlighted some of these communication issues and some of the prob.lems that can arise when small teams of project scientists try to interact with many hundreds or thousands of participants. In Planet Hunters, there was one key scientist who is actively involved with communicating with participants via Talk, the discussion boards and the project blog. This scientist considers it to be an important com.ponent of their involvement in Planet Hunters. From my observations of the project website and from survey and interview feedback, the number of citizen scientists who interact with the project scientists is very small and limited to the core group of approximately 20 very active partici.pants. After interviewing other members of the project team, it appeared that a second project scientist takes part in research-related discussions via email with a small group of participants directly, although these dis.cussions are not visible on the project website (and none of this group took part in the survey or interviews). The Zooniverse does on occasion hold meet-ups for participants. These are open to anybody who participates, although it tends to attract those who are more committed to the projects. I attended one during the sum.mer of 2012 which was held at Oxford University, where some of the project team are based. The day consisted of a series of presentations given by scientists involved with key Zooniverse projects. After the presentations, the forty or so delegates went to a nearby pub. Many of the delegates knew each other and members of the project team reasonably well. Some had been to other meetups, and some took a more active role in their projects as forum moderators. The Zooniverse team members hold these events in order to update core participants about their proj.ects, and to express their gratitude for their continued participation. In Foldit most of the interaction occurs during play via the global and team internet chat. This dialogue is usually between players and seldom involves members of the project team. Communication with the project team occurs through the project forum, the project blog (on the Foldit homepage) and through real time online chats with members of the proj.ect team (either with the developers or with members of the scientific team). These chats generally occur every two months and any player can take part. There are members of the project team who regularly commu.nicate with the players and are more visible than others. Interviews with some of the Foldit developers suggest that the project team place a high level of importance on these interactions. They enable the developers to gather useful feedback from players, and discuss possible improvements or modifications to the game. As with Planet Hunters and Folding@ home, direct interaction between members of the project team and the players is largely restricted to the more active members of the core team. Communities of Practice: Folding@home, Planet Hunters and Foldit After originally developing the concept, further work on communities of practice was carried out by one of the original proponents. Wenger (1998) describes a community of practice as a group of people who share a con.cern or a passion for something they do and learn how to do it better as they interact regularly. There are three essential characteristics of a com.munity of practice. Firstly, the group has a shared domain or interest that they are committed to – it’s not just a club, or network of interest, or a group of friends. Secondly, members of the group engage in common activities, sharing information that allows members of the group to learn from each other. This learning and interaction is crucial for the develop.ment of a community of practice. Finally, members are practitioners who have a shared repertoire of tools, experiences and stories. Communities of practice can develop and improve their practice over time through col.laborative problem solving, seeking the help of others in the community, and discussion and sharing of new developments within their practice. Interaction between professional scientists and citizen scientists, and interaction among active participants can lay the foundation for the development of communities of practice in online citizen science proj.ects. Without this interaction, new knowledge and experiences relating to participation could not be shared as easily, and it is more difficult (if not impossible) for participants to co-operate and collaborate. Each of the three projects I examined possessed some kind of community of prac.tice that exhibits the characteristics outlined by Wenger. They were not always immediately apparent, and some communities were small with only a handful of members. Overclockers and hardware enthusiasts make significant contributions to Folding@home and their expertise (and willingness to shoulder higher electricity bills) has meant that the output of the project is significantly greater than it would be without their involvement. Teams of overclock.ers form communities of practice within this project and there are ample opportunities for cooperation or collaboration between these partici.pants as they strive to improve the performance of their machines. Those who are new to overclocking find advice and support from other enthu.siasts in online forums, and interviews with overclockers in Folding@ home highlighted the importance of learning from more experienced members of the overclocking community, usually through the team they belong to. Most of the respondents talk about what they have learned in relation to the technology (hardware expertise or software skills) associ.ated with their involvement. For some of these participants, learning about computing is one of the reasons they initially became involved in Folding@home, so the opportunity to learn more about hardware and programming in Linux (necessary for some aspects of overclocking) is important to them. Several of the overclockers I interviewed also mentioned other aspects of working within a team with other hobbyists and stated that their involvement also allowed them to develop other competencies such as team-building skills, and being better able to work with others more gen.erally. Most respondents enjoy being involved in a larger community working towards a common goal. I fold to be part of a greater community in the Folding@home world – in this case, lately, as a member of the EVGA folding team where I have developed several years worth of friendships. (F@H 8) The people on this team are great folks – always supportive and willing to help solve issues regardless of what the problem is. If they don’t know the answer, they’ll help dig and find it. Along with the teammates, just the general folding community. (F@H 9) Observations of these forums also highlight the widespread use of technical terms and language that are not always accessible to those out.side the community of hobbyists. Participants in Folding@home who are not hardware enthusiasts would struggle to decipher many of the discus.sion threads on the Folding@home forum. One could also argue that in addition to the various communities of overclockers, the group of Folding@home Beta Testers also represents a community of practice – albeit, one that is not active all of the time. This is a group that is composed of professional software engineers that are hired by the Folding@home team to maintain and fix bugs in the project software, and also volunteers from the project who also have some soft.ware skills. There are approximately 30 members of the Beta Testers (I interviewed seven), some of whom have been contributing to the proj.ect in this way for a number of years. Members of the Beta Testers spoke about learning from other specialists and being able to interact with more of the project team to improve the performance of the software. They also spoke of the community, and of the enjoyment of working with others to develop and share new skills. Building and learning about new hardware has been a blast. I hope to continue being useful to researchers and I currently plan to continue being an active folder and member of the beta team for the foreseeable future. (F@H 6) Communities of practice are not immediately evident among the par.ticipants of Planet Hunters. Participation in this project can be quite soli.tary, and while there are mechanisms in place that try and encourage interaction, they are only used by a small proportion of those who take part. Furthermore, learning through legitimate peripheral participation can be challenging when individuals do not always participate regularly, and where it is not always easy to observe the work of others. This is espe.cially true of Zooniverse projects, and sometimes projects are deliberately designed so that the task is completed independently and not influenced by the work of others. Mugar et al. (2014) explored how new participants learn about the project task in two Zooniverse projects, including Planet Hunters (the other project was Seafloor Explorers). Their study outlines the phenom.ena of practice proxies or traces of others activity, which may act as a guide for new members of the community. Zooniverse projects have a ‘Talk’ feature where participants can make a comment about an item of interest by making either a general description, or noting a specific attribute. By reading these comments, a new participant can learn more about the project task, and sometimes, more about the related science. These traces of others’ activity are often instrumental in the process of learning, par.ticularly in projects where interaction on forums is not especially active or dynamic, and where there is less immediacy in communication. Despite some of the difficulties associated with the way some Zooniverse projects are set up, an interview with one of the project scien.tists revealed that a small group of participants access the source data from the Kepler Mission and work together offline and independently to carry out their own analyses. One of the Planet Hunters scientists spoke to me about this small group. I have contact fairly regularly, at least a couple of times a week, with some of the users by email. So it’s discoveries they’ve made. I guess they coined the term ‘superusers’, they’re the volunteers who monitor the site and collect things and whatnot. I have contact with two main ones and they have people who contact them. It’s just evolved to be that way, which is pretty nice as there are a lot of results, and nothing falls through the cracks. It’s anything from “we found this, we modelled it to this – what do you think?” to anything looking for contami.nation, you know – things in the data that just don’t look right. It could be anything like that. (PH Team 1) They work together analysing the data and consulting with this project scientist. Some of these individuals (none of whom are professional astronomers) have been authors on scientific papers (Schmitt et al. 2014). Unfortunately, the fact that this group operates below the radar meant that I was unable to capture their views and experiences through my sur.vey or interviews. However, the importance of this group is acknowl.edged by other project scientists. I think we have a group who have evolved out of the project interface who are just doing their own analysis…and I think that’s quite interesting. They talk to each other behind the scenes…I think there might be about 20….but they kind of have their own little hierarchical structure as well…although we still have a bit of authority over it… (PH Team 2) The fact that the scientists retain ‘a bit of authority’ over this group is interesting. Does this disqualify the group from being a community of practice? Communities of practice can be hierarchical, and the greater knowledge of a select few can encourage other members of the commu.nity to strive to develop the same skills and expertise. Of the three projects that I explored, Foldit provided perhaps the clearest example of a community of practice. My own participation and experience provided a fascinating insight into how individuals learn from other more experienced members of the community by sharing best practice and acquired knowledge. I was also able to observe and experi.ence first-hand the social dimension of participation and how it moti.vates sustained interest and participation. While it took a lengthy and sustained effort, I was able to become a member of the Foldit community of active players. While not compulsory, Foldit players are strongly advised by the proj.ect team to complete the 36 tutorial puzzles before playing the science puzzles. The science puzzles focus on proteins where the structure is not known, and constitute the main project task. As soon as I had registered to play I began the tutorial puzzles. The first few were straightforward and were completed with relative ease within 5-10 minutes. However after about ten tutorial puzzles, the level of difficulty appeared to increase sharply. The amount of time spent on each tutorial puzzle became pro.gressively longer and I spent up to an hour on some of the later puzzles. More experienced Foldit players emphasised the importance of com.pleting the tutorials to other new players via the global chat and encour.aged newbies to ask for help. New players were also referred to the player-produced Foldit wiki where there was more information on the tutorial puzzles, and short animations that demonstrated how to com.plete each puzzle successfully. I regularly consulted these during my own learning experience, and these helped me to complete some of the more difficult puzzles. As I began to play Foldit, I posted a request for survey participants on the forum. Not long after this I was approached by another player to see if I would like to join the team ‘Go Science’. He suggested that I may gain more of an understanding of the game if I belonged to a team and that I would benefit from the help of others while learning to play. Once a member of this team, I was able to take part in the team chat during play which helped to provide an insight into the interaction between Foldit team members. I also received invaluable advice about the game tools and the use of recipes (the codes sequences of moves that some play.ers use to speed up the game). Several of my team-mates demonstrated a very high level of commitment to Foldit. I would sometimes play in the morning and find that one or two of my team-mates who were based in the US still playing into the night. If I was playing in the afternoon then some of my US-based team-mates would be playing first thing in the morning before they went to work. Watching the interaction within my team and seeing the level of tech.nical understanding exhibited by some of my team-mates inspired me to persevere with the tutorial puzzles so I too could reach their level of com.petence and be able to take part in more specialised discussions. This aspi.ration to be as competent as my team mates was strong, and motivated my persistence with the tutorial puzzles. However, learning to play could be frustrating at times – even with help from others, and I began to under.stand why many prospective players abandon the game in the early stages. Playing the science puzzles proved to be more enjoyable than playing the tutorial puzzles and this was partly due to the competitive aspect. Some of the puzzles are only open to new players and the structure for these proteins is already known. This allows players to further develop their skills, and build up their confidence before moving on to the more demanding puzzles. After several months of what felt like an apprentice.ship, I felt reasonably confident of my skills and managed to rank in the top 50 for a number of the science puzzles. I also felt confident enough to give advice to new players on global chat. In addition to providing an insight into the learning process required to be a Foldit player, my participation also provided a more general insight regarding how and where players communicate, and also the purpose of these interactions. While observations were initially made on the project forum, most of the interaction between players was observed on the global chat. During some of this interaction, players used technical terms relat.ing to the biochemistry of protein folding, or would describe some of the underlying biological process that the recipes were altering, thus demon.strating some detailed knowledge of protein biochemistry. Very few par.ticipants that I surveyed had a background in the biological sciences, and the majority learn about proteins through their involvement in Foldit. One player I interviewed had taken some courses at night school in chem.istry to help him better understand the science behind the game. Players helped each other with the puzzles, and in some cases, worked collabora.tively in solving a particular puzzle (this happened often within my team). In addition to these technical discussions, players use the global chat get to know one another by discussing more personal topics. Most of the interaction I had was with other team mates via the team chat window during online play. Two individuals in particular were extremely helpful and I learned a great deal about the mechanics of the game from them, and how some players take an active role in coaching new players. My team-mates worked together regularly on the same puz.zles, posting their results and arriving at a solution collaboratively. While neither had a background in biology (one was an economist and the other worked in IT), they were confident in their use of the language of protein biochemistry and in the application of what they learned in an area out.side of their expertise. In addition to discussing Foldit, we also had conver.sations about other topics such as our families, jobs, and hobbies. I found team chat to be a very friendly and pleasant place to interact, and this was perhaps one of the most enjoyable aspects of playing and one which kept me returning to Foldit thus sustaining my participation in the game. I also interacted with other Foldit players via the forum. In addition to my first forum postings relating to my survey and research interest, I also took part in other discussion threads including one relating to the tuto.rial puzzles where one of my team-mates suggested that they may need to be simplified. I also posted links to papers or articles where Foldit has been mentioned, and to other online citizen science projects that I thought would be of interest to other players. In addition to my participation in real-time chat and the forum, I observed the ‘Feedback’ area where problems are reported and sugges.tions made to the project team. The number of individuals interacting here is much smaller than on the global chat or the team chat, and I observed many of the same players (numbering approximately 10–15 individuals) over time. These individuals were usually from the core group of players. This small group has a direct connection to the project team, and are present regularly at scientist’s and developer’s chats. Some of the individuals who take part regularly in these chats have been with the game for several years and have been instrumental in guiding some aspects of the game’s evolution and development. While the project team are responsible for the overall maintenance of Foldit, setting the puzzles, analysing the results, and writing them up in the scientific literature, much of the day-to-day interaction appears to occur within the player community on global chat, and on team chat areas. The community of players demonstrate a degree of self-sufficiency and independence from the scientists and developers. One of the players I interviewed summarised this set-up quite accurately: To be honest, I don’t give much thought to them. They are ‘over there’ so to speak. If they pop into chat to ask something, I will respond, but mainly I see them as the fixers of problems, or the givers of news, and the disher-outer of puzzles. (FD 9) The success of Foldit can be directly attributed to its community of participants. They share ideas, experiences, and strategies (including reci.pes) while ultimately advancing the goals of the project. All of the partici.pants I interviewed interact with this wider community, and for many this is one of the most important and enjoyable aspects of their involve.ment. Even players who do not belong to a team interact with other play.ers on global chat, or help new players in some way. Some interviewees talked about the pride they have in the Foldit community and in its achievements, about the friendships they had formed and about the respect they had for their fellow team mates. Being part of a diverse com.munity with a shared goal is one of the most enjoyable aspects of their participation. I like seeing how far we, my group and the whole community, can push the puzzles. I have made several friends in the Foldit community. (FD 6) Being in a group, team play and contributing to the benefit of the group is important to me. (FD 1) The level of expertise that some players develop is widely acknowl.edged by the project team and occasionally, some teams of Foldit players have been included as co-authors on key scientific publications (Khatib et al. 2011). The collaborative efforts of Foldit players are also displayed through their participation in a competition known as CASP – critical assessment of techniques for protein structure prediction. This is a bian.nual competition involving research labs from all over the world where the aim is to predict the structure of a protein molecule while only know.ing the sequence of its constituents. Teams are divided into two groups: techniques involving human intervention, and techniques that are fully automated. Foldit first entered a (human) team in 2008 with tremendous success. Teams of Foldit players have continued to contribute to succes.sive competitions. The Foldit community, as well as communities of overclockers, Beta Testers, and the small core group of Planet Hunters participants, demon.strate the importance of sharing new knowledge and expertise. The jour.ney from ‘reader-to-leader’ runs parallel to the development of communities of practice, and underscores the potential of online citizen science to pro.duce small groups of committed non-specialists who develop their skills and actively contribute to the development of new scientific knowledge. A complex project task can stimulate the development of communities of practice, but the attitude of the project team is also important, either through their willingness to foster the core community (in the case of Planet Hunters), or to let it develop and evolve on its own (as in the case of Foldit). For scientists considering setting up an online citizen science project, providing facilities for interaction and communication, as well as opportunities for development, may prove to be the best approach for getting the most from your participants. Likewise for citizen scientists, such opportunities play an important role in sustaining participation, and make it an enjoyable experience for those who take part. Informal Science Learning In addition to learning through communities of practice, there are oppor.tunities for informal science learning and learning about research more generally. Previous work in this area has demonstrated that involvement in citizen science can improve science literacy and promote a greater understanding of the research process (Cooper et al. 2009; Price and Lee 2013; Bonney et al. 2016; Jennett et al. 2016). Those who set up projects, including the three projects that are the focus of this book, can use them as an opportunity to engage ‘the public’ with their research, and provide online material about the underlying sci.ence via FAQs, links to external resources, and project blogs where they can note key milestones and achievements of the project. However, none of the project managers I interviewed had specific learning goals associated with any of the educational material they provided, and learning was not routinely measured. However, some work has been done on this by those involved in the Zooniverse. Masters et al. (2016) looked at learning across several projects (including Planet Hunters) by examining the perfor.mance of Zooniverse participants on a content-related quiz. They observed that test scores were higher among more active participants, regardless of their educational background. While these learning opportunities were present in all three projects I explored, only a small percentage of survey participants gave this as a reason for joining a project – it was quite some way down the list (interest in science and the desire to contribute to research were the two most important motivations for involvement). However, greater value is placed on opportunities for informal learning as the participant becomes involved and committed to the project. References to learning were more numerous, and of greater importance in the interview feedback – particu.larly among those who were ‘core’ participants. Feedback from Planet Hunters participants specifically mentioned new facts that they had acquired through their involvement, and some, especially those who were involved in finding a new planet, gained an insight into how new knowl.edge was verified, published, and disseminated more widely. Some par.ticipants even gave press interviews about their discoveries. The same is true of those Foldit players who were members of teams that were included as co-authors on key publications. For all three projects, an awareness of the scale of the scientific endeav-our was articulated by study participants and the fact that data analysis was often repetitive and time-consuming was acknowledged. It should be noted however, that most who participate in online citizen science proj.ects already have an interest in science, and some have tertiary qualifica.tions in STEM subjects. This may mean that these participants are open to informal science learning opportunities, and that some may already have an understanding of the research process. The potential for informal science learning in other audiences, for example using online citizen sci.ence in a formal educational setting, requires further investigation. These projects, along with more traditional ecology-based citizen science proj.ects, could help to bring scientific research alive for groups who are not as knowledgeable or engaged (Vitone et al. 2016). A Final Reflection: Interaction and Project Governance One of the most interesting observations I made was that each of the three project teams had experienced some problems interacting with their participants. Some participants stated that they wanted greater communication and feedback from the project management, and some felt they wanted greater consultation before major changes were made to the project. A small number of study participants were quite critical of the way projects were managed and these views were expressed in survey feedback, interviews, and were made on project forums. It shouldn’t be surprising that individuals who have been with a project for many months or years, and have invested a lot of their free time, may develop strong opinions regarding how a project should be managed and what its priorities should be. The extent to which the views of citizen scientists are taken into account, or how (and if) they are consulted when changes are made to a project will need to be considered at some point by project teams - especially if the project runs for many months or years. Such observations raise issues relating to governance, and to what extent the participants are, or can become involved in influencing decisions relating to the project. Project management needs to be responsive to change. For example, after a major re-haul of the points system was met with widespread criti.cism, the Folding@home project team responded to participants’ con.cerns by amending their planned changes, and stating their intention to involve participants more fully in future decisions relating to the project. Previously, the Zooniverse team reconsidered the Talk function (several Planet Hunters interviewees were critical of the vehicle for communica.tion) and asked participants to provide feedback. Of the three projects explored in this research, Foldit appears to take into consideration the views and experiences of participants to a greater extent, and players have been involved in helping to set the parameters of the game since its incep.tion (Cooper 2011). However, the Foldit team have in the past received some negative feedback from players in response to changes to the project software. Perhaps in responses to some of these issues, all three projects have appointed ‘community relations managers’ at some stage in the life-cycle of the project, although the remit of this role appears to vary. Issues of governance may have implications for the sustainability of online citizen science projects by impacting on motivation for sustained participation. Some projects may benefit from greater partnerships between project team members and participants, particularly those with small numbers of active participants. Some individuals invest greatly in these projects (both in time and in financial resources) and top-down governance may not be optimal for some of these heavily involved par.ticipants. Feedback from citizen scientists suggests that some may have certain expectations regarding how much contact they will have with the professional scientists and become annoyed when these expectations are not met. This was apparent in some of the interview feedback from Planet Hunters participants. Project scientists may need to consider and explore the expectations of their participants and tailor their interaction accord.ingly, or be explicit about the role of the project team and how they intend to interact with volunteers from the beginning. Some of the problems relating to interaction between project scientists and citizen scientists may stem from a lack of time or personnel. All of the scientists and developers interviewed were engaged in scientific research full-time, or were involved in other projects. Many of the project team members interviewed spoke of a conflict between doing their ‘day jobs’ and trying to manage large numbers of volunteers. Practically every scientist or developer I spoke to alluded to this and stated that it was impossible to please everybody all of the time. My observations and direct experiences of these projects imply the existence of an unwritten social contract between the project scientists and the citizen scientists, or of a sense of mutual obligations. For exam.ple, in exchange for the time of the participants, scientists provide an opportunity to take part in authentic scientific research and an opportu.nity for informal science learning. This mirrors more general discussions relating to ‘science and society’ in which science has a contract with wider society which is built on trust and a set of expectations of the one held by the other. Gibbons (1999) describes this contract as one where the pro.duction of scientific knowledge is seen by society as both transparent and participative. While this contract is presently ‘unwritten’ in the projects that were investigated, they could be considered and eventually ‘written’. The existence of such a ‘contract’ could help to increase trust and trans.parency, and may ultimately help to sustain participation and more equi.table project communities. References Bonney, R., Phillips, T. B., Ballard, H. L., & Enck, J. W. (2016). Can citizen science enhance public understanding of science? Public Understanding of Science, 25(1), 2–16. Cooper, S. (2011). A framework for scientific discovery through video games. Computer Science and Engineering, University of Washington. Cooper, C. B., Dickinson, J., Kelling, S., Phillips, T., Rosenberg, K. V., Shirk, J., & Bonney, R. (2009). Citizen science: A developing tool for expanding science knowledge and scientific literacy. Bioscience, 59(11), 977–984. https://doi.org/10.1525/bio.2009.59.11.9. Dillenbourg, P. (1999). What do you mean by collaborative learning? In P. Dillenbourg (Ed.), Collaborative-learning: Cognitive and computational approaches (pp. 1–19). Oxford: Elsevier. Gibbons, M. (1999). Science’s new social contract with Society. Nature, 402(supp), C81–C84. Hanson-Smith, E. (2013). Online communities of practice. In C. A. Chapelle (Ed.), The encyclopedia of applied linguistics. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing. Holohan, A. (2013). Community, competition and citizen science: Voluntary dis.tributed computing in a globalized world. Abingdon: Ashgate Publishing. Holohan, A., & Garg, A. (2005). Collaboration online: The example of distrib.uted computing. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 10(4), Article 16. Irwin, A. (1995). Citizen science. A study of people, expertise and sustainable devel.opment. London: Routledge. James, N., & Busher, H. (2009). The displacement of time and space in online research. Sage Research Methods. http://srmo.sagepub.com.libezproxy.open. ac.uk/view/online-interviewing/d7.xml. Jennett, C., Kloetzer, L., Gold, M., & Cox, A. L. (2013). Sociability in virtual citizen science. In CHI’13. Paris. Jennett, C., Kloetzer, L., Schneider, D., Iacovides, I., Cox, A., Gold, M., Fuchs, B., Eveleigh, A., Methieu, K., & Ajani, Z. (2016). Motivations, learning and creativity in online citizen science. Journal of Science Communication, 15(3). Khatib, F., DiMaio, F., Foldit Contenders Group, Foldit Void Crushers Group, Cooper, S., Kaznierczyk, M., Gilski, M., Krzwda, S., Zabranska, H., Pichova, I., Thompson, J., Popovic, Z., Jaskolski, M., & Baker, D. (2011). Crystal structure of a monomeric retroviral protease solved by protein folding game players. Nature Structural & Molecular Biology, 18, 1175–1177. Kloetzer, L., Schneider, D., & Da Costa, J. (2016). Not so passive: Engagement and learning in volunteer computing projects. Human Computation, 3, 25–68. Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning. Legitimate peripheral participa.tion. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Luczak-Rösch, M., Tinati, R., Simperl, E., Van Kleek, M., Shadbolt, N., & Simpson, R.. (2014). Why won’t aliens talk to us? Content and community dynamics in online citizen science. In Eighth International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media. Ann Arbor. Makriyanni, E., & De Liddo, A. (2010). “Fairy rings” of participation: The invisible network influencing participation in online communities. In L. Dirckinck-Holmfield, V. Hodgson, C. Jones, M. de Laat, D. McConnell, & T. Ryberg (Eds.), Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Networked Learning (pp. 285–292). Lancaster: Lancaster University. Masters, K., Oh, E. Y., Simmons, B., Lintott, C., Graham, G., Greenhill, A., & Holmes, K. (2016). Science learning via participation in online citizen sci.ence. Journal of Science Communication, 15(3). Mugar, G., Osterland, C., DeVries Hassman, K., Jackson, C.B., & Crowston, K. (2014). Planet Hunters and Seafloor Explorer: Legitimate peripheral par.ticipation through social proxies in online citizen science. 2014 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work. Paulus, T. M. (2005). Collaborative and cooperative approaches to online group work: The impact of task type. Distance Education, 26(1), 111–125. Pentzold, C. (2011). Imagining the Wikipedia community: What do Wikipedia authors mean when they write about their ‘community’? New Media & Society, 13(5), 704–721. Price, C. A., & Lee, H. (2013). Changes in participants’ scientific attitudes and epistemological beliefs during an astronomical citizen science project. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 50(7), 773–801. Raddick, J. (2013). Date re: number of ‘Talk’ comments from Planet Hunters, Personal communication, 16/09/13. Raddick, M. J., Bracey, G., Gay, P. L., Lintott, C. J., Cardamone, C., Murray, P., Schawinski, K., Szalay, A. S., & Vandenberg, J. (2013). Galaxy Zoo: Motivations of Citizen Scientists. Astronomy Education Review, 12. Schmitt, J. R., Ji Wang, D. A., Fischer, K. J., Jek, J. C., Moriarty, T. S., Boyajian, M. E., Schwamb, C. L., Lynn, S., & Smith, A. M. (2014). Planet Hunters. VI. An Independent Characterization of KOI-351 and Several Long Period Planet Candidates from the Kepler Archival Data. The Astronomical Journal, 148(2), 28. Vitone, T., Stofer, K. A., Sedonia Steininger, M., Hulcr, J., Dunn, R., & Lucky, A. (2016). School of ants goes to college: integrating citizen science into the general education classroom increases engagement with science. Journal of Science Communication, 15, 1–24. Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice: Learning, meaning, and identity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Zeitlyn, D. (2003). Gift economies in the development of open source software: anthropological reflections. Research Policy, 32, 1287–1291. 8 Realising the Potential of Online Citizen Science Online citizen science projects have been important in making scientific research more accessible to a large number of distributed volunteers. Groups of citizen scientists have responded to the challenges presented by these projects, increasing their scientific and technical knowledge, and self-organising into various roles and teams in order to produce new knowledge. This increased openness of scientific research can be placed within the wider context of changes in ‘science and society’, as science becomes more transparent, contextualised, and participative (Gibbons 1999; Nielsen 2012), and also the development of ‘digital scholarship’, where information technology has revolutionised research practices in higher education, and dramatically influenced public engagement with research (Scanlon 2013). Online citizen science projects have mirrored these cultural and institutional changes enabling and empowering inter.ested citizens to become more involved in authentic research. The research presented in this book has also illustrated that aspects of participation are inter-connected, and that a growing body of data exists providing useful insights that can be applied as the next generation of projects are designed and launched. Online citizen science has the potential to engage a range of audiences with research and researchers, and can help to build science capital. © The Author(s) 2018 V. Curtis, Online Citizen Science and the Widening of Academia, Palgrave Studies in Alternative Education, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-77664-4_8 However, the appeal of these projects appears to be greater in certain sec.tors of the population, and the available data suggests that the typical participant is likely to be a well-educated male with an existing interest in science or computing. Participants are also more likely to live in North America and Europe. In our digital world, nothing stays the same for very long. Recent developments, particularly in mobile technology and the development of citizen science apps may help to increase the (global) accessibility of citizen science and the diversity of participants. Other important developments such as the adoption of citizen science by some research institutions as part of their public engagement and outreach pro-grammes, and the use of mobile citizen science within formal science education may also help to increase inclusion in citizen science. This concluding chapter will reflect on what makes a successful online citizen science project, and consider what the future may hold for these projects. Patterns of Participation: A Summary Much of the research carried out on online citizen science to date has concerned itself with motivation to participate. The majority of studies suggest that individuals are motivated to participate because they want to contribute to research and because they have an existing interest in sci.ence. Sustained participation appears to be motivated by the other oppor.tunities on offer: for interaction with other participants (including the professional scientists and developers); involvement in other projects tasks (such as forum moderation); and for informal learning. Individuals can choose the depth of their involvement. The beauty of many of these projects is that they permit microvolunteerism, and an individual can contribute as little or as often as they like depending on how much free time they have and on their level of interest. This flexibil.ity appeals to many. Online forums, and in some cases, synchronous internet chat enable participants to interact with each other, and with project scientists, facilitating co-operation and collaboration. This is par.ticularly relevant to small groups of dedicated participants who find ways to collaborate, learn from each other, and enable the projects they are involved with to achieve significant research success. At the core of participation lies the project task, in particular, its level of difficulty. Whether the task is in an area of science that is of interest, or appealing in some other way, helps to motivate initial participation in a project. However, the task must be packaged in a way that it is appeal.ing to, and can be completed by, non-specialists. Some projects have complex tasks and thus present a high threshold for participation for many. This is observed in the significant drop-out rate in Foldit and the decrease in players with each advancing tutorial puzzle. Hundreds of thousands have tried Foldit, but the active group of participants is in the region of 200–300. The complexity of the project task influences the type of interaction between participants. The greater the task complexity, the higher the like.lihood that participants will need to work with and watch other partici.pants in order to learn how to carry out the task accurately. Participants may then go on to co-operate and collaborate further and solve problems collectively – provided there is a facility for them to interact with each other. Online forums offer this opportunity, but synchronous internet chat appears to be particularly effective in fostering collaboration as it offers an immediacy that an asynchronous forum simply doesn’t have. Greater levels of task difficulty may help to stimulate the development of related roles, such as forum moderator, team coordinator, or a teacher of new participants. It may also stimulate innovation, such as the develop.ment of ‘recipes’ in Foldit, where players write and share code to auto.mate useful sequences of game moves. Motivation, interaction and contribution are further inter-connected. A high level of interaction between participants, or with members of the project team has been shown to be a powerful motivator, and the pres.ence of an online community can help to sustain participation. Online friendships form, and individuals may work with the same group of peo.ple over many months or years. Conversely, highly motivated partici.pants may be more likely to interact with other participants, and want to work or share their experiences with others and thus contribute to a dynamic project environment. A highly motivated individual who is able to interact with others, may, over time, make a significant contribution to a project – particularly if they take on other project tasks. Creating a Successful Project Based on previous research on online citizen science and what has been presented through the case studies outlined in the previous chapters, some conclusions can be made about what makes a successful and sus.tainable project for both professional scientists and citizen scientists. Those thinking about setting up a project should first and foremost, con.sider their objectives. While there may be a specific research outcome, projects may also provide opportunities for public engagement (particu.larly with the process of research), informal science learning, and for building science capital. Science capital is a relatively recent concept, based on Bourdieu’s con.cept of social capital where economic, social, cultural, and symbolic resources (e.g. those that confer prestige) can generate advantage for those that possess it within different spheres of life. This concept has been given a specific scientific focus, and science capital emphasises the importance of social group influences and family cultures (Archer et al. 2015). An individual’s science capital can be determined by their levels of scientific literacy; consumption of science-related media; the use of opportunities for informal science learning; knowing people who work in a science-based profession; and parental science qualifications. Unequal distribu.tion of science capital may account for unequal participation in science-based activities (including citizen science), formal science educa.tion, and careers in science (Edwards et al. 2016). Conversely, science-based activities can be used to strengthen some aspects of science capital. However, to make a significant change in those with low science capital, the activity should be focused and directed at what has become known as ‘under-served’ audiences, those groups who for socioeconomic, geo.graphic, or cultural reasons traditionally have a reduced access to these opportunities. Scientists also need to think carefully about the motivations of poten.tial participants and what they may want from their involvement. Some insight has been provided by previous research, but scientists could also consult directly with potential participants (as the creators of Foldit did) or work with participants to co-create a project. A consideration of par.ticipant needs together with the research objectives will determine how the project task is packaged, what facilities may be needed for online interaction, the design of appropriate tutorials or instructions, and the level of involvement required by the project team. Many online citizen science projects perform a balancing act between the research needs of the scientists and the enjoyment of the participants, but greater consulta.tion with future participants could help to reduce any resulting friction while trying to accommodate these needs. Project teams need to think holistically about what a successful project looks like, the expected outcomes, and how the objectives will be evalu.ated. For example, researchers exploring a range of Zooniverse have put together a ‘success matrix’ (Cox et al. 2015). This quantitative approach considers indices such as publication rate, median number of volunteer classification, median length of volunteer contribution period etc. to pro.duce a score for each project, although a myriad of other approaches could be taken, including ones that allow for regular collection of qualita.tive (as well as quantitative) feedback from participants. Evaluations are rarely conducted by project teams, but they can help to keep a project on track by helping organisers to understand the needs of the participants, and identify any other issues (e.g. data quality) that need to be addressed (Wald et al. 2016). Given the uneven patterns of participation that have been observed in nearly all online citizen science projects studied so far, one of the biggest challenges to those setting up a new project is accommodating varying levels of commitment and involvement. Some participants may want to participate occasionally, while others may seek opportunities to become involved in the research at a deeper level. A project interface therefore, needs to be able to cater for more transient participants (or ‘dabblers’), as well as those who become core contributors. This need to cater for differ.ent types of engagement was articulated by one of the scientists involved in Planet Hunters. We talk a bit about a career in citizen science and that people should go from just clicking on stuff to writing papers and how they can reconnect to a profes.sional. The problem with this type of rhetoric is that you end up sounding like you want everyone to go down that path, whereas I think a lot of our volunteers just want to have a hobby that takes a few minutes…and you can kind of get into trouble…. Jennet and Cox (2014) recommend providing participants with sim.pler tasks to begin with and allowing them to progress to more demand.ing ones. They also recommend building in opportunities for informal science learning, and a mechanism by which participants can get feed.back on their performance from the project organisers. Recent work on some of the Zooniverse projects suggest that participants prefer projects that provide greater autonomy and a wider variety of project tasks (Sprinks et al. 2017). If possible, some effort should be made to offer participants who want to get more involved other opportunities to take their participation to the next level. This could be achieved by making raw data available and giving citizen scientists the opportunity to do their own mini-projects and ask their own research questions (as observed in a small group of Planet Hunters participants), or by offering them other project roles such as forum moderator or software testing. Some individuals like to interact with other participants online and the presence of a project community can help to sustain participation. Being able to interact with others may also help new participants learn about the project and the task, and this is crucial in projects like Foldit. There are a number of ways that online interaction, both between citizen scientists, and between citizen scientists and members of the project team, can be facilitated. This can include forums, blogs, social media, and synchronous internet relay chat, so project organisers will need to decide how online interaction may help them to achieve their objectives. Ongoing consultation with participants may also help project organisers to get a sense of what works for a project community, and to make any necessary adjustments. Distributed computing projects and games like Foldit have demonstrated that introducing a competitive element, and enabling the formation of teams, can also promote interaction between participants. Although this is not always appropriate or feasible, and some clearly do not like too much competition (Eveleigh et al. 2013). Some participants enjoy interacting with members of the project team. Communication with scientists can help to motivate and sustain partici.pation, and make participants feel that their involvement is valued. Those setting up a project need to consider how they will communicate with participants at the outset. Some projects attract many hundreds or thou.sands of registered participants and interacting with these communities of volunteers can be demanding. My conversations with project scientists and developers revealed that most underestimated this aspect of their involvement, and indeed, several had been completely overwhelmed at the beginning. This has also been the experience of some scientists taking part in environmental citizen science projects (Riesch et al. 2013). Some participants (especially those who become more involved and committed to a project) want and expect some interaction with professional scien.tists as part of their involvement in the project, and scientists and devel.opers may need to be explicit about how (and when) they will interact in order to manage the expectations of the community. Supporting communities of volunteers is time-consuming, but it is perhaps one of the most important considerations when it comes to motivating and sustaining participation, and in promoting transparency. How scientists approach this is often indicative of their attitude toward citizen science. Is it an important tool that is fully integrated with their research and their approach to public engagement? In which case, scien.tists setting up these projects need to conceptualise volunteers as part of a distributed lab/project team. Or is it a merely an add-on that is used in the short-term to either acquire funding, or utilise a free source of labour (Riesch and Potter 2013; Golumbic et al. 2017)? Being able to make a contribution to science is one of the most impor.tant motivations for involvement in online citizen science, and project team members need to demonstrate the utility and value of the efforts of citizen scientists. This was summed up by one of the Planet Hunters team: …we’ve been entrusted with 18 million classifications so the main thing is we have to get as much science out of that as possible. I feel that the worst thing would be to waste people’s time. In addition to regular communication with citizen scientists about the progress of the project and important milestones, the effort of volunteers can be directly acknowledged on resulting publications. Sometimes, a team or very committed individual can be listed as a co-author, or a paper may publish a link to a list with the names of all those who have contrib.uted to the project, as is the practice in many Zooniverse projects (Khatib et al. 2011; Lee et al. 2014; Lintott et al. 2009; Schwamb et al. 2013). Volunteers value recognition for being productive. However, there may be other ways to demonstrate recognition and appreciation (especially in the absence of publications). These could be as straightforward as offering online badges, certificates or awards when certain achievements are reached (e.g. a number of classifications, or months of involvement), or something more personal such as face-to-face meet-ups and conferences. For example, participants in Zooniverse projects have been invited to day-long meetings where scientists representing the various projects pro.vide updates and give participants the opportunity to ask questions or offer feedback about the projects. Project Governance Managing interaction with participants is crucial to the success of a proj.ect, particularly in projects which are organised in a top-down fashion (like most online citizen science projects) where the scientists are the ones who are likely in charge (Mueller et al. 2012). When setting up a project, scientists need to consider to what extent participants are involved in decisions about the project, and if they are to be consulted about major changes in project parameters (for example changes in the way points are awarded). Will there be mechanisms where participants can give feed.back and suggestions to the project team with the knowledge that they will be taken seriously? These issues of governance should be considered in relation to the sus.tainability of the project, and as a means of promoting transparency. Individuals who make a substantial personal investment (and financial investment in the case of some participants in distributed computing projects) may want to become more involved in decision making, or at least, be consulted when major changes are made to the project. Arrangements may also need to evolve over time, and some projects may benefit from greater partnerships between project team members and par.ticipants, particularly those with small numbers of active participants. Observations and feedback from participants in Foldit, Folding@ home and Planet Hunters imply the existence of an unwritten social con.tract between the project scientists and the citizen scientists, or of a sense of mutual obligations. This mirrors more general discussions relating to ‘science and society’ in which science has a contract with wider society which is built on trust and a set of expectations of the one held by the other. Gibbons (1999) describes this contract as one where the produc.tion of scientific knowledge is seen by society as both transparent and participative. While this contract is presently ‘unwritten’ in the projects that were investigated, they could be considered, debated, and eventually ‘written’. The presence of material of this nature on a project website could help to increase trust and transparency and may ultimately help to sustain participation. A project charter could also address other issues that could manifest themselves such as the generation results that have potential commercial benefits or result in the production of patents. There appears to be very little consideration of this issue, or of the claim that citizen scientists could have on any intellectual property that may be created as the result of their efforts. These developments relate to more engaged ways of conceptualising citizen science to counter some of the concerns raised about the potential for exploitation of those choosing to volunteer (Medvecky and Leach 2017). A growing body of work on ‘engaged research’ in the UK may also offer some insights for those interested in working with non-academic stakeholders to co-produce new research, and new knowledge. This work questions current academic practices and advocates cultural change whereby external groups are involved in any or all, stages of the research process, and argues that engaged research produces better quality research, and promotes a greater ‘fairness of knowing’ (Holliman 2017; Holliman et al. 2015). Mobile Technology and Citizen Science One of the more exciting developments in relation to the impact of infor.mation and communication technologies on citizen science is the revolu.tion in mobile devices such as smartphones and tablets. Ownership of mobile phones and tablet devices is increasing rapidly. At the end of 2017 there were over 5 billion smartphones in use around the world, including 1.3 billion in China, and one billion in India (GMSA  2017). Smartphones, especially those that incorporate digital cameras and sensing devices, are used increasingly in citizen science projects. At the time of writing (begin.ning of 2018), over 100 citizen science apps could be downloaded from the Apple App Store. The Oxford English Dictionary defines an app as “a piece of software designed to perform a specific function other than one relating to the opera.tion of the computer itself; especially one designed specifically to run on a mobile phone or tablet computer.” Most citizen science apps that are currently available require the par.ticipant to record and / or upload environmental data or other types of observations. These can include sightings of animal or plants species (e.g. iNaturalist, iSpot, and Invasive Alien Species Europe), tracking of pheno-logical events (e.g. Monarch Migration), disease and symptom surveil.lance (e.g. BritainBreathing), air quality data (e.g. iSpex), and light (with the appropriate sensors). Data is used by scientists for research purposes, or it can be used by communities to monitor and address local commu.nity issues such as air quality (e.g. the Mapping for Change project). Like other types of citizen science project, the data collected can be used to influence or inform environmental policy. Citizen science apps have only been around for a few years, and cur.rently, there is very little published data relating to who they appeal to and why, or about more general patterns of participation. Some prelimi.nary work in this area suggests that there may be some similarities with online citizen science (and citizen science more generally) with regard to motivation to participate. A study of over 1100 participants in an app-based project that measured atmospheric aerosol concentration, found that the key motivations for participation were a desire to contribute to research, and an interest in the topic of the study (Land-Zandstra et al. 2016). Demographic data from this group also showed a skew toward male participants, who were older and well educated – a pattern that is very common in online citizen science. Further research is needed about the social dimension of these projects and how the design of the app can facilitate both interaction between par.ticipants, and promote opportunities for informal learning. Offering opportunities for social interaction and learning will help to differentiate citizen science apps from the thousands of other apps that are available, and with which they will ultimately have to compete with. Some apps approach this aspect of participation by integrating other platforms such as project websites, and linking to social media. The European Citizen Science Association (ECSA) describes citizen science apps as ‘socio-technical’ and recommend that the social aspects of participation require attention from the very beginning of the design process. ESCA have produced a compre.hensive set of guidelines for the design of citizen science apps that address design features, opportunities for education and outreach, data standardi.sation, and some of the ethical considerations (Sturm et al. 2017). For example, if data is uploaded and shared does this compromise the privacy of participants, particularly in relation to their geographical location or personal data that may be contained within their project account? Online citizen science projects, as explored in this monograph, do not require any data input from participants. However, some of these projects can be accessed on mobile devices. The Zooniverse has adapted the design of some of their projects, so that they can be readily accessed on a phone or tablet, although more work is needed to improve their functionality. Some citizen science games such as Phylo, Quantum Moves and MalariaSpot, are available on mobile devices, although other projects including Foldit and distributed computing projects require too much processing power. Self-contained online citizen science projects could join the growing list of citizen science apps in the future. Enthusiastic proponents of citizen science apps have maintained that they can democratise access to science and enhance the enjoyment of nature. Although others maintain that these apps have yet to capture the public imagination on a significant scale, and that citizens need to be more closely involved in the design process and provided with opportuni.ties to engage with the data that is produced (Jepson and Ladle 2015). Currently, there really isn’t enough data available on participation and uptake that can support either position. Given the novelty of the technol.ogy, one could presume that these apps may be more appealing to younger people and help them to become more engaged with science and nature, particularly if they are used within a formal educational setting. The ubiq.uity and global reach of smartphones may also result in a greater diversity of participants, and we even may start to see greater participation in coun.tries of the Global South, and in countries such as China and India. However, smartphone ownership is much lower in some parts of the world such as Sub-Saharan Africa, and the majority of phone owners here still use the basic kind. The cost of the smartphone and data are prohibi.tive for many, and in areas where electricity supply is limited or unpre.dictable, charging the battery can be problematic. However, the basic phone can still be used for many purposes. It enables a widely used and successful money transfer system for example, and SMS messages are used by health workers for sending information, and also to share infor.mation about educational resources as part of UNICEF’s EDUTRAC scheme (Gittens 2016). A group of researchers based at University College London, have utilised basic mobile technology and worked with popula.tions in the Congo Basin and Namibia to co-create citizen science proj.ects where geographic data is collected and shared, and local community maps are produced (Vitos et al. 2013). These maps can be used to address a variety of local issues such as sustainability, regeneration, and facilitate discussions with other stakeholders. Such initiatives have sought to address issues of inclusion and access in a way that realistically takes into consideration local conditions. Professor Jenny Preece, a keen proponent of environmental citizen sci.ence apps believes that they could prove to be invaluable in addressing some of Humankind’s biggest challenges, such as preserving biodiversity (Preece 2016). It is likely that citizen science apps will constitute an important component of the next generation of citizen science projects, but in order for their potential to be realised, Preece believes that there are five important challenges that need to be addressed. 1. How can we motivate long-term participation? 2. How can we encourage inclusion particularly in poorer countries where the effects of global warming and decreased biodiversity are already being felt? 3. What makes a successful citizen science community? 4. Can we develop frameworks to understand community evolution and commonalities? 5. What kinds of technological infrastructures are needed for different types of communities and projects? Some of these questions have been addressed in relation to online citi.zen projects such as Foldit, Folding@home and Planet Hunters that have been presented in this book (as well as the work undertaken by other researchers). The findings from this body of work may well be relevant to patterns of participation in citizen science apps. For example, a desire to contribute to science and an interest in project topics are likely to be important motivations for initial engagement with an app-based project. Opportunities for community interaction and engagement, as well as opportunities for learning may prove to be important factors that help to sustain long-term participation. A similar exploratory approach that incorporates ethnography and case studies in addition to more quantita.tive data about patterns of participation in app-based projects is needed. This will help to address some of the above challenges and increase our understanding of how citizen science apps are being used, and what their potential may be in the future for addressing globally relevant issues and increasing inclusion and diversity in the participant base. Along with developments in mobile technology, we may see an increase in citizen science projects and apps that incorporate aspects of computer games (gamification), or are adapted into a game like Foldit. The latter have been particularly slow to emerge, and there are still very few projects where the research has been completely re-packaged as a computer game and has generated published scientific results. Foldit, EteRNA and Phylo (three of the first citizen science games) have been joined by a few others such Quantum Moves, Fraxinus and MalariaSpot. With the growth of citizen science apps, we are seeing more projects that are games-based, and the emergence of these projects may help to engage ‘non-traditional’ audiences (Newman et al. 2012). However, they will have to compete with the likes of Candy Crush, Angry Birds and other popular mobiles games which may prove to be very challenging to games designers. The creators of Phylo have compiled a list of ‘simple rules’ to create a serious game that include providing an appropriate narrative and context, allowing communication between participants, as well as more obvious design features such as providing levels for more commit.ted players to advance to, and the effective use of graphics and sound (Baaden et al. 2017). Widening the Appeal of Online Citizen Science Research has consistently demonstrated that online citizen science proj.ects (as well as some contributory, environmental projects) appeal to groups that are more likely to be well-educated (often with formal STEM qualifications) and who are already ‘fans of science’. This is unsurprising, and is also the case for audiences and participants of other science-based activities instigated by researchers to engage with ‘the public’, and amongst the visitors to science centres and museums (Curtis 2013; Dawson 2014). While citizen science and other public engagement activ.ities can help to build science capital, they appear to appeal to those who are already endowed with significant amounts. For example, participants in Foldit, Folding@home and Planet Hunters were well educated, and took part in many other science-based activities in addition to their involvement in citizen science. However citizen science and other public engagement initiatives can also be used to build this capacity in other groups who have demonstrated less interest in science-based activities, and may not believe that these pursuits (or places) are meant for them. If we build it, they do not necessarily come. As is case for public engage.ment activities, citizen science projects may need to be actively presented to and targeted at groups who wouldn’t normally take part. Moving online citizen science into the classroom could be one approach that may help to increase the diversity of participants simply by making it part of the science curriculum, rather than a voluntary extracurricular activity. Using online citizen science projects can help to introduce authentic scientific research to a range of ages and abilities, and to those who may not have access to it (perceived or otherwise) particularly in communities where there is low science capital. Online citizen science may have some advantages over other types of citizen science project in that it doesn’t require any contribution of data, or perhaps as many resources as other types of citizen science (apart from a computer and con.nection to the Internet), and students do not have to leave the confines of the classroom which can be difficult to organise at times. Online citizen science covers a breadth of disciplines, and projects can be found that link to current topics covered in most science curricula, and they can be used in a primary, secondary, or tertiary settings. In addition to learning about the scientific process, students who are exposed to these projects may develop more positive attitudes toward science more generally, and toward careers in STEM subjects (Wallace and Bodzin 2017). Some of the online citizen science projects explored in this book have considered how their respective projects could be used by teachers to sup.port formal science education. The Zooniverse platform has a repository of lessons and resources for teachers called ZooTeach that includes guides to projects for students and teachers, teacher-created presentations designed to introduce students to a particular project, and age-appropriate lessons that have been developed by the educational team. An important sub-set of users in the Zooniverse are science teachers. Research carried out by Woodcock et al. (2017) found that the ZooTeach platform allowed teachers to use a live scientific project in the classroom to teach pupils about the scientific method as well as the findings of scientific research. The SciStarter website, which serves as a gateway to many citizen science projects, has a comprehensive guide for teachers and groups projects according to whether they are appropriate for elementary, middle or high school (or beyond). However, involving students in online citizen science isn’t always easy. From my own experiences of playing and observing Foldit, significant disruption to the player community could occur when groups of students started playing Foldit without adequate support (or without going through the tutorial puzzles), and flooded the global chat area with questions and (sometimes rude) comments. While there is considerable potential for the application of citizen sci.ence in formal science education, there is (currently) a paucity of data about how and where they are used, or evaluations of any outcomes. According a review of the use of environmental citizen science in a class.room setting, the Internet has facilitated opportunities for citizen science, allowing scientists to “develop, manage, and utilize internet-based citizen-science projects for the purpose of furthering science itself, as well as the public understanding of both science and of the scientific process” (Shah and Martinez 2016). However, longitudinal studies are required in order to determine whether this is the case. There is also a lack of evidence on the long-term learning benefits of classroom-based citizen science (Sharples et al. 2015). Citizen Inquiry projects, which combine inquiry-based learning with citizen science, may provide greater opportunities for students to initiate their own investigations and ask their own research questions – which is not always possible in the range of online citizen science projects on offer. Mobile devices can be used to collect data and data can be shared with others. However, these projects do place relatively high demands on teach.ers, and incorporating online citizen science projects rather than inquiry-based projects may be suited to some situations. Whether this approach is followed, or if students directly participate in online citizen science proj.ects, teachers as well as students need to be supported and given appropri.ate training for using the projects within a classroom setting. In the United Kingdom there are efforts underway to bring a more authentic experience of science to classrooms through participation in real research. For example, the Institute for Research in Schools (IRIS) works to provide schools with access to real data, and research opportunities in part.nership with universities, research institutes including CERN, and organ-isations such as Transport for London. One of their most recent projects, launched in 2017, involves the development of an online citizen science project with scientists based at the Wellcome Genome Campus in Cambridgeshire. Genome Decoders enlists the help of secondary school.children to help annotate the genome of the human whipworm parasite, an intestinal parasite that infects about 700 million people world-wide. The project has been launched to over 60 schools across the UK and Ireland. An evaluation of previous IRIS projects has shown that aspiration, participa.tion, and attainment are increased in pupils who participate in their initia.tives, and that teachers can feel re-energised about their subjects (Parker 2017). Scientists with access to large data sets who want to create an online citizen science project, may well want to consider how a project could be used in a formal learning environment, and perhaps even explore the pos.sibility of co-creating a project with educators that will help to build science capital in young people, as well as meeting their own research needs. Some Final Thoughts This book has examined key aspects of participation in online citizen sci.ence projects, namely, who participates, why they participate, and how they participate. A concerted effort has been made to review the literature for all published work relating to participation and to consider the find.ings of others alongside my own in-depth investigation of Foldit, Folding@home and Planet Hunters. However, work continues, and new studies are appearing regularly. I have considered the views and experi.ences of both the scientists and developers who set up and manage the projects (which appears to be lacking in previous work) although more research on the experiences of scientists involved in online citizen science would be valuable. We are still very much in the age of big data, so there is scope for the development of new projects, particularly in astronomy and bioinformat.ics. Over time, machine learning and the development of more effective algorithms may mean that some types of data analysis may no longer require any human input. However, projects like Foldit, which rely on diversity in spatial recognition and problem-solving will (hopefully) have a future. More work on how online citizen science projects can be made more suitable for smartphones and tablets is necessary if new and perhaps younger and more diverse groups of participants are to be reached. Online citizen science projects offer volunteers an opportunity to become involved in authentic scientific research. Feedback from surveys and interviews with participants suggest that this opportunity is highly valued. Scientists and developers are able to carry out research with the help of volunteers that may not have been possible otherwise. Significant contributions to knowledge have been made and communicated widely both in the academic literature and in the media. While the numbers of active participants may be smaller than those who initially register or shown an initial interest, online citizen science projects have great potential to involve non-specialists citizens in the production of new knowledge. However, we must be cautious about any claims that these projects are democratising science. Most online citizen science projects are still cur.rently organised in a top-down fashion and the teams of scientists and developers are the ones who are in charge, making key decisions about the research questions and the design of the projects. The power is unevenly distributed. That online citizen science has evolved in this way is under.standable given that many developed from the need to get external help to analyse very large datasets. Other ‘benefits’ such as opportunities for pub.lic engagement and informal science learning were only realised later on. The data presented here also clearly demonstrates that online citizen science appeals to a specific demographic: those who are confident engag.ers of science living in the developed world. As it currently stands, these projects not very inclusive despite the relative simplicity of some of the projects tasks and the ease with which they may be physically accessed. Greater efforts are needed to reach more ‘under-served’ audiences, and groups who may feel that these opportunities simply aren’t meant for them. This will require project teams to actively engage with and pro.mote their projects to new audiences, and to take advantage of some of the approaches outlined in this chapter such as making greater use of mobile devices, and working within a formal educational environment. Greater inclusion and greater diversity of participants may directly ben.efit projects by bringing new perspectives and approaches to the data, particularly if provision is made to encourage participants to get more involved in their own analysis of the data, and to ask their own questions. Opening up scientific research in a more inclusive way also has wider societal benefits such as increasing the transparency of science, de.mystifying the processes of research to those outside of the academy, and helping to build science capital thus empowering citizens who would otherwise be excluded. References Archer, L., Dawson, E., DeWitt, J., Seakins, A., & Wong, B. (2015). “Science capital”: A conceptual, methodological, and empirical argument for extend.ing bourdieusian notions of capital beyond the arts. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 52(7), 922–948. Baaden, M., Delalande, O., Ferey, N., Pasquali, S., Waldispühl, J., & Taly, A. (2017). 10 simple rules to create a serious game, illustrated with examples from structural biology. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.04176. Cox, J., Eun Young, O., Simmons, B., Lintott, C., Masters, K., Greenhill, A., Graham, G., & Holmes, K. (2015). Defining and measuring success in online citizen science: A case study of Zooniverse projects. Computing in Science & Engineering, 17(4), 28–41. Curtis, V. (2013). Contemporary issues in scientific engagement: Evaluating the motivations and expectations of those attending a public astronomy event. Communicating Astronomy to the Public, 13, 14–18. Dawson, E. (2014). “Not designed for us”: How science museums and science centers socially exclude low-income, Minority Ethnic Groups. Science Education, 98(6), 981–1008. Edwards, R., McConnell, D., Simpson, I., & Wilson, A. (2016). Science capital and citizen science. Stirling: University of Stirling. Eveleigh, A., Jennett, C., Lynn, S., & Cox, A. L. (2013). “I want to be a Captain! I want to be a Captain!”: Gamification in the Old Weather Citizen Science Project. Paper read at Gamification 2013, October 2–4, at Stratford, Ontario. Gibbons, M. (1999). Science’s new social contract with Society. Nature, 402(supp), C81–C84. Gittens, D. (2016). Basic cell phones still rule in developing countries. In HYLA Blog. Golumbic, Y. N., Orr, D., Baram-Tsabari, A., & Fishbain, B. (2017). Between vision and reality: A study of scientists’ views on citizen science. Citizen Science: Theory and Practice, 2(1), 6. GSM Association. (2017). Number of mobile phone users worldwide. https:// www.gsmaintelligence.com/. Holliman, R. (2017). Supporting excellence in engaged research. Journal of Science Communication no., 16(5), 1–10. Holliman, R., Adams, A., Blackman, T., Collins, T., Davies, G., Dibb, S., Grand, A., Holti, R., Mckerlie, F., & Mahony, N. (2015). An open research university. http://oro.open.ac.uk/44255/1/OpenResearch-web_hires.pdf. Jennett, C., & Cox, A. L. (2014). Eight guidelines for designing virtual citizen science projects. Paper read at Second AAAI Conference on Human Computation and Crowdsourcing. Jepson, P., & Ladle, R. J. (2015). Nature apps: Waiting for the revolution. Ambio, 44(8), 827–832. Khatib, F., Cooper, S., Tyka, M. D., Kefan, X., Makedon, I., Popovic, Z., Baker, D., & Foldit Players. (2011). Algorithm discovery by protein folding game players. Proceedings of the National Academy of Science – Early Edition 108 (.47), www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1115898108. Land-Zandstra, A. M., Devilee, J. L. A., Snik, F., Buurmeijer, F., & van den Broek, J. M. (2016). Citizen science on a smartphone: Participants’ motiva.tions and learning. Public Understanding of Science, 25(1), 45–60. Lee, J., Kladwang, W., Lee, M., Cantu, D., Azizyan, M., Kim, H., Limpaecher, A., Yoon, S., Treuille, A., Das, R., & EteRNA Participants. (2014). RNA design rules from a massive open laboratory. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1313039111. Lintott, C. J., Schawinski, K., Keel, W., van Arkel, H., Bennert, N., Edmondson, E., Thomas, D., Smith, D. J. B., Herbert, P. D., Jarvis, M. J., Virani, S., Andreescu, D., Bamford, S. P., Land, K., Murray, P., Nichol, R. C., Raddick, M. J., Slosar, A., Szalay, A. S., & Vandenberg, J. (2009). Galaxy Zoo: ‘Hanny's Voorwerp’, a quasar light echo? Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 399(1), 129–140. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2966.2009.15299.x. Medvecky, F., & Leach, J. (2017). The ethics of science communication. Journal of Science Communication, 16(4). Mueller, M., Tippins, D., & Bryan, L. (2012). The future of citizen science. Democracy & Education, 20(1), 1–12. Newman, G., Wiggins, A., Crall, A., Graham, E., Newman, S., & Crowston, K. (2012). The future of citizen science: emerging technologies and shifting paradigms. Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment, 10(6), 298–304. Nielsen, M. (2012). Reinventing discovery. The new era of networked science. Princeton: Princeton University Press. Parker, B. (2017). Why don’t we let young people contribute to cutting edge science at school? The Guardian, https://www.theguardian.com/science/life.and-physics/2017/nov/03/why-dont-we-let-young-people-contribute-to.cutting-edge-science-at-school. Preece, J. (2016). Citizen science: New research challenges for human–com.puter interaction. International Journal of Human-Computer Interaction, 32(8), 585–612. Riesch, H., & Potter, C. (2013). Citizen science as seen by scientists: Methodological, epistemological and ethical dimensions. Public Understanding of Science, 23, 107–120. Riesch, H., Potter, C., & Davies, L. (2013). Combining citizen science and public engagement: The Open Air Laboratories Programme. Journal of Science Communication no., 12. Scanlon, E. (2013). Scholarship in the digital age: Open educational resources, publication and public engagement. British Journal of Educational Technology, 45(1), 12–23. Schwamb, M. E., Orosz, J. A., Carter, J. A., Welsh, W. F., Fischer, D. A., Torres, G., A Howard, W., Crepp, J. R., Keel, W. C., & Lintott, C. J. (2013). Planet hunters: A transiting circumbinary planet in a quadruple star system. The Astrophysical Journal, 768(2), 127. Shah, H. R., & Martinez, L. R. (2016). Current approaches in implementing citizen science in the classroom. Journal of Microbiology & Biology Education, 17(1), 17. Sharples, M., Aristeidou, M., Villasclaras-Fernández, E., Herodotou, C., & Scanlon, E. (2015). Sense-it: A Smartphone Toolkit for Citizen Inquiry Learning. Paper read at International Conference on Mobile and Contextual Learning. Sprinks, J., Wardlaw, J., Houghton, R., Bamford, S., & Morley, J. (2017). Task Workflow Design and its impact on performance and volunteers’ subjective preference in Virtual Citizen Science. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 104, 50–63. Sturm, U., Schade, S., Ceccaroni, L., Gold, M., Kyba, C., Claramunt, B., Haklay, M., Kasperowski, D., Albert, A., & Piera, J. (2017). Defining prin.ciples for mobile apps and platforms development in citizen science. Research Ideas and Outcomes, 3, e21283. Vitos, M., Stevens, M., Lewis, J., & Haklay, M. (2013). Community mapping by non-literate citizen scientists in the rainforest. Bulletin of the Society of Cartographers no., 46(1-2), 3–11. Wald, D. M., Longo, J., & Dobell, A. R. (2016). Design principles for engaging and retaining virtual citizen scientists. Conservation Biology, 30(3), 562–570. Wallace, D., & Bodzin, A. (2017). Developing scientific citizenship identity using mobile learning and authentic practice. Electronic Journal of Science Education, 21(6). Woodcock, J., Greenhill, A., Holmes, K., Graham, G., Cox, J., Eun Young, O., & Masters, K. (2017). Crowdsourcing citizen science: Exploring the tensions between paid professionals and users. Journal of Peer Production, 10. Index1 NUMBERS AND SYMBOLS 90-9-1 Principle, 128 A Accessibility, 7, 12, 13, 61, 62, 168 Altruism, 71, 73–75, 106–108, 110 Andromeda Project, 35 Annotation, 29 Apps, 168, 176–179 Astronomy, 30, 34, 41n7, 51–54, 56, 58, 81–84, 96–98, 103, 113, 183 Asynchronous forum, 38, 95, 169 B Berkeley Open Infrastructure for Network Computing (BOINC), 6, 47, 48, 78, 80, 88n1, 124 Beta Testers, 24, 100, 103, 125, 131, 147–150, 153, 159 Big data, 4, 5, 183 Blog, 4, 23, 30, 33, 34, 39, 84, 96, 116, 144, 149–151, 160, 172 BOINC, see Berkeley Open Infrastructure for Network Computing C Case study, 8–13, 19, 49–60, 121, 170, 179 Centre for Game Science, 36 CERN, 182 Charter, 175 Citizen cyberscience, 5, 9 Citizen inquiry, 181 1 Note: Page numbers followed by ‘n’ refer to notes. © The Author(s) 2018 V. Curtis, Online Citizen Science and the Widening of Academia, Palgrave Studies in Alternative Education, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-77664-4 Citizen science games, 6, 10, 21, 38, 50, 58, 72, 85, 86, 98, 123, 177, 179 Classification, 6, 29–33, 41, 81, 85, 114, 121, 123, 137, 171, 173, 174 Classroom, 13, 180–182 Clickworkers, 6 Climateprediction.net, 78, 80, 123, 127 Co-authors, 30, 32, 36, 159, 161, 173 Collaboration, 4, 13, 14, 19, 36, 38, 41, 58, 63, 73, 77, 86, 117, 125, 135, 143–146, 148, 152, 168, 169 Collectivism, 71, 75 Commons-based peer production, 13, 69, 73–76 Communities of practice, 13, 135, 143–163 Community action research, 1 Community management, 145 Competition, 24, 26, 27, 38, 77, 85, 87, 95, 96, 139, 143, 149, 159, 172 Computer games, 50, 56, 57, 94, 111, 179 Consent, 11, 12 Contribution, 2, 13, 20, 21, 26, 27, 29, 30, 33, 40, 41, 59, 71, 74–77, 79–82, 84, 85, 87, 95–99, 101, 103, 105, 106, 108, 110, 112, 117, 121–130, 132–140, 146, 148, 152, 169, 171, 173, 180, 183 Co-operation, 13, 14, 19, 38, 99, 117, 139, 145, 146, 148, 152, 168 Core group, 33, 40, 109, 124, 125, 131, 135, 150, 158, 159 Cornell Laboratory of Ornithology, 1 Cosmoquest, 47, 48, 58, 78, 84 Crowdsourcing, 5, 36 D Dabblers, 122, 130, 132, 133, 135, 171 Data deluge, 4, 5 Democratisation, 45, 62, 63 Demographic, 8, 12, 20, 21, 45–49, 53, 54, 61, 63, 85, 176, 184 Digital scholarship, 167 Digital technologies, 4 Discussion boards, 33, 34, 147–150 Distributed computing (DC), 6, 9, 10, 14n3, 20–22, 24–27, 36, 46–48, 50–54, 56, 57, 71–73, 77, 78, 80, 81, 85, 88n1, 98, 111, 123, 124, 129, 130, 136, 145, 172, 174, 177 Distributed thinking, 6, 10, 20, 21, 29, 48, 71, 77, 81, 98 Diversification, 13, 40, 140 Diversity, vi, 3, 47, 60, 64, 110, 116, 124, 125, 127, 128, 134, 140, 168, 177, 179, 180, 183, 184 Donors, 136 Dusters, 72 E Egoism, 71, 73, 75 Einstein@home, 53 Empowerment, 3 Engaged research, 175 EteRNA, 38, 50, 86, 179 Ethnographic, 8, 10, 79, 83, 94 European Citizen Science Association, 177 Evaluations, 137, 171, 181, 182 Evolvers, 37, 40, 126 Exoplanets, 30, 33, 98, 104, 113 Eyewire, 47, 79, 85, 148 F Folding@home, 10, 13, 14, 21–30, 40, 41n2, 41n4, 49–53, 56, 57, 59, 60, 75, 76, 79, 87, 88, 96–105, 108, 111–113, 124–127, 129, 131, 134–137, 140, 144, 146–160, 162, 174, 179, 180, 183 Foldit, 10, 11, 13, 14, 21, 35–41, 49–51, 53, 56–60, 63, 75, 76, 79, 83, 85–88, 94, 95, 98–101, 104–106, 109–111, 116, 117, 123–127, 129, 131–135, 138–140, 144, 146–149, 151–162, 169, 170, 172, 174, 177, 179–181, 183 Forum, 10–12, 24, 25, 27, 35, 38, 40, 51, 57, 60, 78, 81, 83, 84, 94–97, 109, 121, 123–125, 127, 133, 135, 143–163, 168, 169, 172 G Galaxy Zoo, 6, 29, 46, 47, 54, 71, 78, 79, 82, 84, 96, 123 Gamers, 21, 40, 50, 56, 139 Games with a purpose, 21 Gamification, 7, 82, 179 Genome Decoders, 182 Global South, 177 Governance, 13, 117, 161–163, 174–175 Granularity, 85, 107, 130 Graphics processors, 22, 27 Great Internet Mersenne Prime Search, 46, 145 Green pea galaxies, 82 H Hand folding, 39 Hanny’s Voorwerp, 82 Hardware enthusiasts, 26, 41, 51, 52, 57, 59, 80, 81, 85, 98, 99, 112, 125, 147, 152, 153 Hobbyists, 26, 27, 57, 96, 101, 123, 152, 153 I ICT, see Information and communication technology Inclusion, vi, 63, 85, 168, 178, 179, 184 Inclusivity, 12, 13 Informal learning, 29, 62, 84, 124, 145, 160, 168 Information and communication technology (ICT), 3, 4, 55, 175 Institute for Research in Schools (IRIS), 182 Interview, 8, 9, 12, 13, 23, 35, 58, 78, 79, 82, 83, 86, 100–105, 117, 132, 134–136, 138, 145–148, 150–152, 154, 155, 161, 162, 183 ‘Intro’ puzzles, 37, 40 K Kepler, 30, 32–34, 96, 113, 116, 154 K2 Exoplanet Explorers, 35 Large Hadron Collider, 4 Large Synoptic Survey Telescope, 4–5 Leader board, 23, 26, 31, 40, 85, 126, 145 Learning, 2, 7, 13, 14, 29, 35, 60, 62, 70, 74, 75, 80, 83, 84, 87, 94–96, 102, 104, 109, 117, 124, 125, 143–146, 148, 152–154, 156, 157, 160–161, 163, 170, 172, 176, 179, 181–183 Legitimate peripheral participation, 144, 145, 149, 154 Light curve, 30–33, 95, 137 Lua, 39, 59, 126 M MalariaControl.net, 46, 48, 78–81 MalariaSpot, 177, 179 Mark2Cure, 79, 86 Meet-ups, 96, 150, 174 Mentor, 124 Meta-analysis, 8 Milky Way Project, 123 Mixed methods approach, 9 Mobile phones, 175, 176 Mobile technology, 13, 168, 175–179 Moderator, 11, 25, 34, 40, 57, 94, 96, 121, 125–127, 135, 149, 151, 169, 172 Motivation, 7, 19, 69–88, 93–106, 108, 110–117, 122, 160, 168–170, 173, 176, 179 Multiplayer game, 20, 35, 86 N NASA, 6, 30, 32, 41n5 Non-credentialed, 3 O Old Weather, 29, 49, 82, 85, 122 Online communities of practice, 13 Online survey, 9, 20, 26, 49, 53, 54, 78, 79, 86, 97–100, 103, 150 Open-access journals, 4 Open notebooks, 4 Open science, 4, 45 Open-source software, 13, 69, 73, 74, 80, 105, 106, 144 OpenStreetMap, 74, 77, 128 Overclockers, 26–29, 41, 41n3, 51, 57, 59, 80, 81, 85, 98–103, 108, 112, 123, 125, 127, 136, 147, 149, 152, 153, 159 Oxford Internet Survey, 59 P Pande Group, 23, 97, 102 Participant observer, 10, 12, 20, 40, 94–96 Participatory action research, 1 Partnerships, 3, 63, 162, 174, 182 Phylo, 21, 50, 86, 177, 179 Planet Hunters, 6, 10, 13, 14, 21, 29–35, 40, 47, 49, 53–56, 58–60, 75, 76, 79, 83, 87, 88, 95–101, 103–106, 108, 113–116, 124–127, 129, 132–135, 137, 138, 140, 144, 146–163, 171–174, 179, 180, 183 Plankton Portal, 123 Points, 23, 24, 28, 30, 31, 36, 37, 39, 72, 77, 80, 85, 97, 100, 101, 108, 115, 116, 126, 133, 135, 137, 139, 140, 145, 150, 162, 174 Policy, 1, 12, 176 Power-law distribution, 33, 124 Privacy, 11, 177 Profile page, 23, 28, 39, 40 Project team(s), 12, 25, 34–36, 38, 39, 84, 97, 103, 109, 111, 113–117, 133–138, 145, 148–151, 153, 155, 158, 159, 161–163, 169, 171–174, 184 Protein folding, 22, 23, 38, 39, 99, 127, 157 Protein misfolding, 22, 23 Publications, 2, 7, 10, 21, 23, 25, 29, 30, 32, 34, 36, 41n1, 41n6, 58, 63, 113, 125, 134, 136, 140, 150, 159, 161, 171, 173, 174 Public engagement, 2, 56, 60–63, 114, 167, 168, 170, 173, 180, 183 Q Qualitative research, 9 Quantitative research, 9 Quantum moves, 47, 48, 79, 86, 98, 123, 177, 179 R Reader-to-leader framework, 13, 128–130, 132, 133, 159 Recipes, 39, 40, 59, 124–126, 156–158, 169 Reputation, 71, 74, 79, 108, 130 Reward, 3, 71, 72, 80, 83, 94, 97, 99, 100, 105, 106, 108, 130 Rig, 27, 41n3 Rosetta@home, 36 S Science 2.0, 4 Science capital, 62, 63, 167, 170, 180, 182, 184 Science puzzles, 37–39, 139, 155–157 Scientific discovery game, 21 Scientific literacy, 2, 63, 87, 170 SciStarter, 181 Screensaver, 23, 24 Self determination theory, 72, 105 Sensing, 176 SETI@home, 5, 6, 14n3, 46, 53, 54, 57, 77, 78, 84, 85, 88n1, 145 Smartphones, 175, 177, 178, 183 Snapshot Serengeti, 35, 47, 79 Sociability, 145, 148 Social capital, 61, 62 Social media, 4, 30, 34, 172, 177 Spacewarps, 35 Stardust@home, 6, 29, 41n5, 71, 72, 78, 84, 85 Sub-Saharan Africa, 178 Sustainability, 35, 55, 69, 121, 162, 174, 178 Synchronous chat, 25, 37, 38, 125, 146 T Tablets, 175–177, 183 ‘Talk’, 31, 33–35, 147, 149, 150, 154, 155, 162 Team(s), v, 23–29, 31, 34–40, 50, 51, 54, 59, 77, 79, 85, 87, 94–97, 103, 104, 108–117, 121, 123–127, 133–139, 145, 147–159, 161–163, 167, 169, 172, 173, 181 Threshold fear, 60 Transit, 31, 33 Transparency, 62, 173–175, 184 Typologies, 3, 10 U Under-served audiences, 170, 184 V Virtual badges, 100 Volunteering, 13, 49, 69, 70, 75, 76, 83, 105 W Web 2.0 technologies, 4 Wiki, 94, 124, 126, 128, 156 Wikipedia, 13, 33, 40, 69, 73, 74, 76, 105, 128, 129, 131, 144 World Community Grid, 46, 48, 51, 53, 57, 78, 81 Z Zooites, 29, 59, 63, 71, 96, 137 Zooniverse, v, 6, 7, 10, 11, 14, 20, 21, 29, 30, 32–35, 41, 41n6, 41n7, 46–50, 53, 54, 57–60, 63, 79, 81–84, 96, 98, 104, 115, 122, 123, 127, 130, 134, 136, 138, 148, 150, 154, 160, 162, 171–174, 177, 181 ZooTeach, 181 