UCLAUCLA Previously Published WorksTitleIndigenous, Ethnic, and Cultural Articulations of New MediaPermalinkhttps://escholarship.org/uc/item/40p4k54tJournalInternational Journal of Cultural Studies, 9(4)AuthorSrinivasan, RameshPublication Date2006Peer reviewedIndigenous and Ethnic Articulations of New MediaRamesh SrinivasanDepartment of Information Studies, UCLAAbstract: This paper extends a lineage of research that reveals appropriativepossibilities by which indigenous and ethnic communities have appropriated mediatechnologies to serve their own cultural, political, and social visions. This paperfocuses on networked and database-driven “new” media and information systems,and the possibilities and potentialities these hold within cultural scenarios. A case ispresented that has focused on Native communities within the United States. Throughthis presentation, I present a methodology, process, and analysis of the means bywhich information systems can enable culturally and community-focused goals.The isolating and stratifying impacts of new media are widely discussed whenpertaining to indigenous and ethnic communities. Emerging from these critiques isthe term “digital divide” [www.digitaldividenetwork.org, NTIA(1999 and 2000)], andmaintains two meanings. First, it can apply to the notion of ownership. This indicatesthat existing ethnically-correlated stratifications would only be accentuated by thosewho own, operate, and control the roles of new information systems. Secondly, anumber of writers have flatly assumed that new technologies inherently create ethnicbiases. These critiques lie not so much in problems fundamentally with thetechnological system itself, but rather how it is used to reinforce structures of power,and therefore stratify.However, in parallel to these critiques, a number of relevant initiatives and studieshave pointed to the empowering potentials held by internet-based technologiestoward ethnic and indigenous communities. This includes literature that uncovershow communities can utilize the internet to exchange information, preserve histories,generate diasporic identities, and share resources that can enable collective politicaland social causes to be realized. This paper focuses on the empowering potentialheld by the use of (a) servers and networks, and (b) databases within informationsystems. The possibilities these hold to enable fragmented and underprivilegedcommunities is discussed in the context of my fieldwork with 19 Native Americanreservations based in San Diego County (California, United States).New Media and CommunityA number of social scientists have questioned the potential held by informationsystems toward forming and sustaining community. At the forefront, Paul Virilio hasdenounced new media technologies, and the means by which they “virtualize” thephysicalized understanding of landscape, geography, and culture. His concern is thatthrough new media there is an overemphasis on “real-time” versus ‘real space’ or‘real life’.The specific negative aspect of these information superhighways is preciselythis loss of orientation regarding alterity (the other), this disturbance in therelationship with the other and with the world. . .Up to now, history has takenplace within local times, local frames, regions and nations. But now,globalization and virtualization are inaugurating a global time that prefigures anew form of tyranny [Virilio (1995, p.1)].When community is no longer understood in geographical terms, fears and critiqueshave arisen [Sassen(1999), Oldenburg(1989)] . Robert Putnam points to the loss ofgeographically-localized communities as factors that accompany the emergence of1network media [Putnam(2000)]. Public spaces, local cafes, and bowling alleys – allplaces of meeting in traditional Western civic society, are largely obsolete socialspaces today. Putnam argues that Western societies (focusing on American societies)have become disconnected from the traditional means by which people receive socialaffirmation. These have included family and friends, recreational leagues, politicalparties, and religious institutions. Heightened intra-community interaction generatesgreater social capital, loosely defined as the cohesion of a community in providingresources for itself. Putnam finds a decline in civic, religious, and politicalparticipation across American society, and argues these losses in social capital arelinked to lower educational performance, higher crime rates, and other negativephenomena[Putnam(2000)].How do new media technologies affect this dynamic? Putnam argues that this is stillan unanswered question. It seems clear that the context of technology usage wouldbe important to clarifying this issue. Social network theorists, for example, havediscovered that “social” uses of information systems can positively impactcommunity formation and sustenance, through the sharing of information resourcesand creation of common spaces for socializing and communication [Wellman andGulia (1999)].Culture and Community - Visual MediaThe prevailing discussion has been limited to a passive understanding of new media,as a set of technologies that are imposed upon the public, rather than as a tool thatcan be utilized to achieve locally and culturally specific visions. The understanding ofmedia and technologies as emerging from a central source and vision has led to theassumption that they have in turn projected values that derive from the “cultureindustries” and reify power dynamics between the owners and consumers of thetechnology (Horkheimer and Adorno (1976)). By recognizing the possibilities fortechnologies to serve specific community aims, new media can instead beunderstood as a catalyst for new interpretations and alternative paradigms(Hall(1973)).Faye Ginsburg, an anthropologist from New York University, has detailed a numberof efforts by which media technologies have empowered ethnic and indigenouscommunities [Ginsburg(2002)]. “Screen Memories” discusses the means by whichthe Inuit people of the Arctic re-create oral traditions through the media of film andvideo. This has been done without an intrusive intervention, and merely by makingtools available that can address pressing needs. While re-telling stories involves theirbeing reshaped, as discussed by Ong [Ong(1988)] and others [Goody andWatt(1968), Lord(1960)], preservation is a process that requires adaptation tocompeting demands and an altered cultural and political context. For example,Ginsburg discusses the means by which Inuit filmmakers have created films as aresponse to dominant objectified representations.Rather than destroying Inuit cultures as some predicted would happen, thesetechnologies of representation – beginning with the satellite televisiontransmission to Inuit communities of their own small-scale video productions –have played a dynamic and even revitalizing role for Inuit and other FirstNations people, as a self-conscious means of cultural preservation andproduction and a form of political mobilization.. . .(The benefit of new media)is apparent not only in the narrative constructions of Inuit history on their ownterms, but in integrating it with Canadian modernity, embodied in the flow oftelevision [Ginsburg(2002, p. 41-42)].2Ginsburg’s example reveals how film and video technologies have allowedcommunity members to create and disseminate their reflections on present dayrealities and future visions. This example demonstrates the importance of repurposing the Frankfurt School critique of culture industries within a model ofappropriation that place those traditionally disadvantaged into the position of creatorand broadcaster. This is a step further than the process of traditional appropriationand reception studies [Hall(1973), Morley(1992)], wherein the fan [Jenkins(1992)]or receiver re-tells or re-creates an already once released narrative. Instead, thecontent and utilization of the technology are placed in the hands of the community.Terrence Turner’s work with the Kayapo people of central Brazil extends Ginsburg’sanalyses by overtly studying the impact of community-created media on cultural,educational, and political efforts [Turner(1992)]. The purposes of his researchinvolved initiating a video-creating process to advance and develop various politicaland cultural community agendas. Introducing the technology of video camera to theKayapo translated into an involvement and documentation of the negative effects ofgovernmental hydroelectric dam schemes. The video documentation was broughtback to the people by the appointed video creators and informed the different tribesof the impending danger. The Kayapo discovered that using their video camerasallowed them to interview and question Brazilian bureaucrats and politicians with alevel of legitimacy that the government official would have to answer. Ultimately,this work translated into an international exposure for the community, as they wereable to demonstrate their land rights issues on an international stage that couldsupersede even the Brazilian national government.Turner argues that while media scholars have worked in the domain of ethnographicfilm with an end purpose in mind, few reflect on the possible effects of anobjectifying medium such as film’s impact on the social and cultural consciousness ofthe people involved. The question of who owns and controls the films that arecreated may seem unimportant, but this often has a significant effect on thecommunity itself. With the Kayapo, the different roles occupied in the video makingprocess had an impact on their relative abilities to advance within the tribalgovernment.From the moment they acquired video cameras of their own, the Kayapo havemade a point of making video records of their major political confrontationswith the national society, as well as more exotic encounters such as their tworecent tours to Quebec to support the Cree Indians in their resistance to agiant hydroelectric dam scheme that would have flooded their land. They havealso employed video to document internal political events such as meetings ofleaders from different communities to settle disputes or the foundation of newcommunities. . . The Kayapo do not regard video documentation merely aspassive recording or reflection of existing facts, but rather as helping toestablish the facts it records. It has, in other words, a performativefunction.[Turner(1992, p.11)]Essentially, the aspects of video that are often criticized – its exhibition and framingof the subject – are what the Kayapo have exploited to achieve their own aims. Overa series of successful political struggles from 1970-1982, the Kayapo have recoveredland the size of Scottland as well as entered the international stage to championcauses of sustainable development and indigenous rights.Turner’s example is extended in the work of Eric Michaels, focused on the WarlpiriAborigines of Western Central Australia [Michaels(1994)]. Michaels provides a3pathbreaking illustration of the use of television as a localized information sourcethat transforms issues of economy and power structures within the community. Hisexample extends the approach of Turner and others by focusing towardinfrastructures as technologies that maintain local and culturally specific control.These technological solutions involved the creation of a low-frequency, low-powercommunity transmitter that would allow community members to select from avariety of locally produced programs. The process generated an expansion of topicscovered through these video programs, and correspondingly, shifts within socialorganizations of the community to accommodate the television feed. Fascinatingly,Michaels observes a seamless transition between the oral traditions and electronicmedia.There is no necessary translation from orality to electronics; we areinstead seeing an experimental phase involving the insertion of thecamera into the social organization of events [Michaels(1994, p.65)]Therefore, cultural control has been placed around the creation, transmission, anddissemination of visual media for the Warlpiri. Similar to Turner, this work maps toimportant issues of self-determination within the community, not only in terms ofcontent created, but also with decisions made as to external satellite-derived feedsof national or international programming. These levels of control reveal the potentialby which local populations can generate self-sustaining indigenous media that canlive independently of the researcher’s presence.The above examples demonstrated means by which technologies are appropriated byindigenous groups to achieve community-focused cultural, political, educational, andsocial objectives. These technologies emerge from ethnographic research that iscommunity-focused. Yet the impact and discussion of these projects must not beconsidered solely within the case-study or domains of the fieldwork, but in a largerplay with national and international notions that define the concept of “indigenous”,through media, politics, and other conduits. These are critical social and culturalissues that emerge through the culture-media examples and propositions I articulatein this paper. Hartley and McKee encapsulate these discussions as the “indigenouspublic sphere”.It follows that we believe the ‘indigenous public sphere’ stands as amodel for other developments in late modern culture. . .in thedeveloped Western world as a whole. New notions of citizenship havearisen that stress culture, identity, and voluntary belonging overprevious definitions. . . Media are primary and central institutions ofpolitics and of idea-formation; they are the locus of the public sphere[Hartley and Mckee(2000, p.4)]The precedents I have discussed are limited to the visual broadcast media of film,video, and television infrastructures. But what do “new” interactive, web-based,network and database-driven digital media hold in the indigenous and ethnic realm?Efforts of media cultural studies scholars must center on the novel possibilities heldvia “new” media that were unavailable in video, television, and film precedents. Ipoint to two features that both hold great relevance in the convergence of culturalstudies and new media: (1) client-server architectures (networks), and (2)databases (classification and object preservation).4Feature One: Bridging Space - Diaspora, -Scapes, and NetworkedMediaTraditionally, community has been conceived of around the bounds of geographicalneighborhood and cultural background. However, in an epoch of globalizationcharacterized by flows that connect individuals and objects across distance and viatechnological mediation, implications toward community must be re-conceived. ArjunAppadurai’s essay “Disjuncture and Difference in the Global Cultural Economy”[Appadurai(1998)] focuses on the cultural implications of the global flows ofinformation and capital. Via these flows, community may be imagined and impacted[Anderson(1990)], and through the digital networks that enable interaction acrossdistance, national and local politics are shaped. Traditional ethnic and local notions ofcommunity are deterritorialized via Appadurai’s description of “ethnoscapes”, onedimension of transnational cultural flow.Appadurai’s explains that culture and community have shifted from the local to the –scape. He points to the struggle by the Sikh immigrants (in the West) to further thecause of an independent homeland (Khalistan) within India, although the populationis only connected via the mediascape of a set of internet technologies.These landscapes thus, are the building blocks of what, extending BenedictAnderson, I would like to call ‘imagined worlds’, that is, the multiple worldswhich are constituted by the historically situated imaginations of persons andgroups spread around the globe [Appadurai(1998, p.27)].Community is therefore ‘imagined’, mediated through the imageries of the“mediascape”, ideologies of the “ideoscape”, and ever-shifting demographics ofethnicity (“ethnoscape”) and information. As ethnicity and its study becomes a multisited discipline, new media, due to its networked client-server abilities, holdspotential as a means to connect distributed ethnic populations across geographicaldistance.This invokes the concept of diaspora, the minority expatriate communities thatoriginate from a homeland but have migrated to new host country [Safran(1991)].The identity of diaspora is often framed relative to the dual relationships held withthe ancestral homeland as well as the new host country. In an era of global culturalflow, the diaspora issue grows in importance. With advances in networkedtechnologies, diaspora now maintain social and political ties that are transnational,including fellow communities in other host countries and homeland. Can the internetallow an identity to be imagined that is transnational in nature? [Morley andRobins(1995)].A number of notable studies have focused in on the impact new media holds ondiasporic identity formation, cultural expression, politics, and so on. Mitra’s researchon Indian immigrants and their uses of newsgroups [Mitra(1997)] presents dualresults: (1) National identity is imagined simply via the transnational membership inthe virtual space, and (2) National identity is fragmented via the fractureddisagreements and ongoing dialogues that result via a newsgroup that is atemporaland therefore without an end. Additionally, the original understanding of migrationas a strong break from the homeland has been reversed by the recognition thatnetworked media has enabled migrants to maintain ties to the originating country[Mitra(1997), Castles and Davidson(2000)]. Homelands serve as means of culturalidentification for these communities and create an imagined sense of one-ness,5according to scholars of transnational migration [Anderson(1991), Ginsburg et.al(2000)].The next feature impacted via the convergence of diaspora and new media is that ofmobilization. Kwok [Kwok(1999)] has described how the internet can enable ethniccommunities to globally react, communicate, share resources, and mobilize inreaction to global events. Marginalized discourses can be published without having toenter into the traditional top-down editorial processes that Adorno and Horkheimerare so critical of. It therefore introduces the possibility of resistance that is inherentin every relationship of power [Foucault(1983)]. Diaspora can introduce web sites topresent marginalized perspectives but can also create electronic systems to presenttheir culture and ideas to visitors and virtual tourists [Srinivasan(2004), Chan(2005),Miller and Slater (2000), Kwok(1999), Ho, Babeer, and Khondker(2002)].Nationalism can be promoted from afar via these diaspora through the creation ofsites that assert rights to territorial states [Bakker(2001)]. One example of this isthe means by which Uyghur (region in Western China) activists and non-govermentalagencies [Gladney(2003), Kanat(2005) ] have utilized the internet to link to oneanother, receive international financial and other support, and popularize theirpolitical/cultural causes by presenting their distinct cultural histories in opposition tomainland China. These new media connections have played an important role inreinvigorating Uyghur identity amongst dispersed groups while creating a newdisaporic, transnational identity that is relatively independent of the “East Turkestan”homeland. The Uyghur example complements the work of Tekwani on the Tamildiaspora in Sri Lanka [Tekwani(2003)]. Tekwani argues that digital networkscomplement the social, political, and economic networks that have always sustainedinter-diasporic relationships, and that the internet is particularly useful to diasporabecause of the power of immediacy it offers to share resources in light of spatialdispersion. This networked feature has presented the Tamil diaspora of Sri Lankawith the possibility to promote their cause yet also militantly organize resistances tothe national government.A final example is provided in Jon Anderson’s study on electronic mediation acrossthe “cybernauts” of the Arab Diaspora [Anderson(1995)]. Anderson has researchedhow the Middle East’s overseas immigrants are finding each other via the Internetand forming communities that are decentralized and non-hierarchical in contrast tothe traditional at-home social organizations. The connections these cybernauts haveinclude a bricolage of different media components.What emerges in all of these venues is what I have called a creolizeddiscourse [Anderson(1995)] that mixes bits of wire service news,transcriptions of sermons, intense debate about home-country issues,stories of expatriate life and notices of cultural events, sources of foodand of cheap flights home, and even matrimonials. [Anderson(1997)]Anderson has identified that new worlds and spaces of interaction are created thatintegrate Iraqis without being as fundamentally tied to the homeland itself. In thatregard, this example differs slightly from the Uyghur or Khalistan examples. TheMiddle East has become public according to Anderson and its public visibility startsand ends via these new media technologies. In the Middle East itself, barriers ofaccess has limited those online to elites. Therefore, the egalitarian facets of thevirtual space are not shared as uniformly within the homeland.6In addition to the diaspora example, indigenous communities have also appropriatednew media to activate their own cultural, political, economic and other causes. Awide variety of indigenous web-sites are now in existence, some created by nongovernmental organizations, and others created by communities themselves (seehttp://www.hanksville.org/NAresources/indices/NAactivist.html for example). NativeAmericans, the subject of this paper’s study, are at the forefront of this movement,having organized a vast variety of sites that either represent a tribal nation, anarchive, a political movement, or a economic institution. Native American leadershave used the internet to generate support from within and outside their nations, toexchange and share resources, to coordinate cultural activism through pow-wows,etc., and so on. With the recent opening of the Smithsonian’s National Museum ofthe American Indian, many activists and leaders have joined forces via this commoninstitutional affiliation.The point across both the indigenous and diasporic examples is clear: the networkednature of new media technologies enables sharing, identity formation,communication, and publicization to occur nearly instantaneously without beingbound by the realities of physical distance. However, the danger remains of a newdigital colonization of these internet sites:Clearly, the Internet provides indigenous peoples powerful new means of selfrepresentation, but as its use expands and intensifies, so does the “overseeinggaze” of encapsulating polities and transnational corporations. This given, thecurrent relief form from visual imperialism afforded to indigenous peoples bythe web may be phantasmagoric and the “visual performative” alone will notoverturn their subaltern positions in the political arena [Prins(2002), p.72]As Harald Prins aptly points out, it is critical for communities to work to developmedia that cannot be incorporated or absorbed by the imperialistic influences heidentifies. By implication, the challenge is clear: Communities must push to developnew media and information systems that are not just exhibitions or aggregations ofcontent, but also are built around locally and culturally specific representations andparadigms.Feature Two: Databases, Ontologies, and Cultural DiscoursesWith this challenge, I introduce the second highlighted feature new media offers toethnic and indigenous communities, that of databases and ontologies. New mediacan extend the powers of video by also preserving and classifying the creations ofthe community within an information architecture, or ontology, which can berepresentative of the community’s priorities or a specific cultural discourse[Srinivasan and Huang(2005)]. This provides the potential to answer Prins’s chargeand engage communities to not only be the creators but also architects of theirmedia and information systems. Creating spaces that are based around thecommunity’s own representations and discourse may enable media to truly serve thecommunity’s specific priorities, rather than presenting a space that isincommensurable with a culture’s traditions and own categorizations of knowledge. Itmay allow an “indigenous” approach toward development to result[Srinivasan(2006)].The institutional approach toward approaching this issue of databases andrepresentation is present in digital archives and library research. Archival researchhas expanded to consider electronic records [Gilliland-Swetland(2005)], focusing on7the ability to store, classify, and interpret provenance through database annotations.A number of international organizations have emerged to develop classificationschemes for cultural heritage material that is preserved in a database and servedglobally. These efforts have converged with new platforms and mark-up languagesdeveloped by Computer Scientists, with a first breakthrough as XML. Each effort hashad to consider the question of ontology, or the architecture of the knowledgerepository, and its relevance to the material being circulated. In global culturalheritage databases, the ontology is expressed by the different standards that arearticulated for particular cultural domains. As an example, the European Union’sDublin Core (http://dublincore.org/) project maintains a set of particular standardsthat drive the architecture of its database systems. It is notable that it maintainsthree major priorities: (a) Developing metadata standards for discovery acrossdomains, (b) Defining frameworks for the interoperation of metadata sets, and (c)Facilitating the development of community- or disciplinary-specific metadata setsthat are consistent with items 1 and 2.Therefore, the goals of bridging knowledge *across* domains is key to thedevelopment of the standards by which cultural knowledge is indexed and annotatedwithin Dublin Core’s media systems. It adheres similarly to certain models that havebegun to introduce themselves into the literature on digital libraries and digitalmuseums. For example, the ABC model, described by Hunter and Lagoze [Hunterand Lagoze(2001)], classifies objects as entities that maintain temporality, actuality,and abstraction as their three layers of categorical data. Temporality is a referenceto events, precedences, and sequences. Actuality is a layer that refers to anythingthat can be physically detected, whether it be a view, smell, or touch. Finally,abstraction is related to concepts and only references a concept when it is articulatedor acted upon.What is clear when one begins to analyze these metadata models is that they arebuilt around a system of logic that follows traditional notions of rationality. Theassumption in Hunter and Lagoze’s work that a concept only can instantiate when itis articulated publicly imposes a number of assumptions around the contextualizationand notion of the cultural object and how it is perceived. These are systems that donot seem to primarily be concerned with the community or specific cultural group’sauthorship, epistemology, or ontology.Presenting a Community-focused ApproachThe projects and models presented concern themselves with both the networked anddatabase-classification aspects of new media, but in both cases I have presentedexamples that have yet to truly engage the possibilities to enable communities toauthor, classify, and own their media and information systems.My research has focused toward ethnography that drives the development, design,and deployment of a new media system of new media. The communities with which Ihave worked have understood my approach as non-traditional and anti-imperialist,and instead a collaborator seeking to develop new media that is owned and designedby ethnic and indigenous communities.The case presented to demonstrate this approach is Tribal PEACE (PreservingEducation and Cultural Expression), a web-based information system created with 19Native American reservations of San Diego (California) county as part of my doctoraldissertation work between the years 2003-2005 [Srinivasan(2005)].8Tribal PeaceThe reservations of San Diego County derive from the once contiguous andconnected nations of Kumeyaay, Luiseno, Cupeno, and Cahuilla. These nationstended to maintain contact with one another but largely existed as separatecommunities based on blood lines. However, historical dynamics and the creation ofthe reservation system have fragmented and disconnected these peoples from oneanother and a collective cultural history. Indeed, today, native languages, songs, andrituals remain largely lost across the reservations.Figure 1: The 19 Native Reservations of San Diego County and interconnecting highways (source: San Diego Geographical InformationSystems)The goal of this research was to study the impact of a community-designed andcreated media system on resolving disconnections that the reservations face. One isa disconnection from cultural memory, as just explained. The second goal isspatially-focused and based around employing the networked power of new media tore-connect the fragmented reservations of the region. It is notable, however, thatthis re-connection would not establish a community that once existed. Indeed, given9that each of the nations were separate entities and communities, the re-connectionwould establish an “imagined community” around the shared media system.The physical dispersion of the reservations is conveyed in the above map. Not only isthis dispersion expressed in terms of the distance between reservations, but also inthe lack of access to major highways and freeways of the area. While the density ofpopulation increases significantly as the map approaches the San Diego city in theSouthwest region of the map, placement in areas of relative isolation has left theNative reservations at a significant disadvantage in terms of transportationinfrastructure. Disconnection is thus accented by the inadequacy of transportinfrastructure and a disadvantageous landscape for many of the reservations withinSan Diego County. Even on the individual reservations, land title is not contiguous.This has created the so called “checker-board” pattern on the scale of a singlereservation where to reach one point of the reservation to another, one must passthrough non-reservation land. This lack of contiguity and boundedness generates thefragmentation on the micro-scale. Indeed, natives often allege that the fertile landon their reservations is given to non-natives and farming cooperatives. As anexample, here is a GIS-generated map of the San Pasqual reservation:Figure 2: The checker-boarded layout of the San Pasqual reservation(source: SanGIS)I was invited to work with the leaders of these 19 reservations through anorganization known as the SCTCA (Southern California Tribal Chairmen’sAssociation). The SCTCA had received a massive technology grant from HewlettPackard that provided up to 5 million dollars worth of digital network infrastructure,10earmarked for wireless internet towers, computers, projectors, video cameras, andso on [http://www.hp.com/e-inclusion/en/project/tribal1.html]. This infrastructurewould be based around the goals of rekindling ancient networks of kinship amongstthe reservations that had been destroyed over time. In essence, the grant wouldprovide a “Tribal Digital Village” (TDV). Of course the provision of this internet accessand technology would not guarantee a “village”, but instead provide theopportunities all communication infrastructures offer. Therefore, I was invited todevelop a media environment that could serve as a space of exchange andpreservation across the 19 reservations. This project, it was decided, would be calledTribal Peace. My first meeting with the community leaders (via the SCTCA) was inDecember, 2003. At this point, interest was expressed in collaborating on a projectthat could build on the TDV infrastructure. It was not until February of 2004,however, that I was able to secure permission from the SCTCA’s Education andCulture Committee, at a meeting taken place on the Barona reservation. Thecommittee consists of cultural representatives from each of the 19 reservations andmakes collective decisions to collaborate with outside researchers. At this meeting,approximately 50 members were present, and after presenting and answeringquestions on previous research [Srinivasan(2004), Srinivasan(2002)], permissionwas granted to begin the project. Active ethnography began at this time, and ShontaChaloux, a leader from the San Pasqual reservation, was given the role of serving asthe project leader on behalf of the SCTCA. Shonta’s role was to publicize the projectacross the reservations, and engage community members to participate indeveloping their own media pieces to submit and share with others across thereservations. A number of pieces had already been created through previous SCTCAprograms, and ancestral songs, images, and languages had been digitized.Reservation members had already begun utilizing the technologies to digitize anddocument traditions, language and songs. Moreover, stories reflecting contemporaryissues and realities had begun to be created through the use of the video camerasavailable at the different reservation “resource centers”. Ultimately, I had spent closeto six months intermittently (November, 2003 – April, 2004) on the reservationsbefore Tribal Peace went “live”.As I spent much of the next 18 months (11/03 – 5/05) on the reservations, my goalbecame to develop bonds with as diverse a group of tribal elders, leaders, andinstitutions across all the reservations as much as possible. This would allow theproject to interact with diverse networks and power structures across thereservations rather than inherently serve as a tool of those already in deeperconnection with the SCTCA. Additionally, I worked to gain the blessings of triballeaders and icons already serving as threads of connection across the communities,such as medicine people, tribal chairmen, cultural leaders, and so on. It wasunderstood that the system must be embedded within the sociocultural context andrespect the threads and networks it maintains, rather than existing as a negation ofthis.Reservation members had already begun utilizing the technologies to digitize anddocument traditions, language and songs. Moreover, on a very basic level storiesreflecting contemporary issues and realities had begun to be created, primarilythrough the use of the video cameras that were present at the different reservation“resource centers”. Ultimately, I had spent close to six months intermittently(November, 2003 – April, 2004) on the reservations before Tribal Peace went “live”.11By April of 2004, Shonta and I had assembled a committee of 20 individualsspanning 15 of 19 reservations to serve as the overseers and leaders of the project.This committee membership was open to any who wished to join, and itsmembership to this day remains fluid. The committee meets bi-monthly to discusshow the system could continue to empower reservation members to continue tobridge space and connect with one another around shared information and priorities.It consists of members from different reservations and has attracted individuals toparticipate who have normally not been strongly tied to existing cultural initiatives.With the initial April meeting, the committee gathered to view the 75 media piecessubmitted for the system. They discussed the appropriateness of showing pieces toall members of the community, the importance of being sure information would becommunity intellectual property, and possibilities to deploy content into educationaland cultural initiatives that were ongoing across the reservations. This meetingserved as the first opportunity for community members to design the Tribal Peacesystem, and the means by which it could be built around culturally-specificrepresentations and priorities. The process of eliciting a collective ontology amongsttribal members was challenging and involved the primary leadership of Shonta(where I was present as largely an observer and to answer any clarifying questions).Committee members viewed the different media pieces, paused videos at differenttimes, and free-listed topics that were considered important by consensus. Aftercompleting discussion about all 75 pieces, the list was finalized with some topicsremoved and others added. The committee then created a structure to represent theinterrelationships between these topics, engaging in dialogues regarding which topicswere more related to others within the world of the reservations. They expressed theneed to be able to re-visit the ontology diagram at any time and modify the structureas they see fit. They also stressed the importance of enabling submitters tocontinually adapt the annotations they choose to provide to their submissions. Withthese steps finalized, the following initial ontology was created:12Figure 3: Initial Tribal Peace Ontology (topics/concepts with the rootsserving as the reservations) – author: Ray EsqueroThis ontology represents the community’s overall structure of priorities and issues.As further content is added to the system and issues change, the ontology shalladapt based on the committee’s reflections and redesign. The continual adaptation ofontologies therefore corresponds to events that may occur on the reservations overtime, such as natural disasters (which have made their way more prominently intothe created content and ontology nodes) or political movements toward sovereignty.The adaptation also adheres to the growth of the system across the reservations. Ascommunity members become more engaged by submitting new content, joining theproject committee, and commenting on each other’s content, the ontology shalladapt accordingly. The infusion of educators, medicine people, and political leadersinto project involvement over time has therefore impacted system content andontology structure. Over time, therefore, the system has begun to accommodate thevoices of educators and the voices of cultural leaders who have begun to see thesystem as a powerful tool in their daily purposes. For example, the oral traditions ofbird-singing, prayer, and native languages, can be easily digitized and disseminatedacross the reservations for archival and educational purposes. There has thus been a13natural linkage between these oral and cultural histories and the visualperformativity of the new media system [Ong(1990)].14Figure 4: The System Upload Page – where nodes of the ontology can bechecked in annotation of a submission (authors: Alexander Allain andRamesh Srinivasan)The ontology is a discretely re-designed representation of the convergence betweenthe system’s databases and community’s cultural articulations. It provides amechanism for community members to annotate and re-annotate their submissionswith a set of collective topics. System visitors can browse through content based onthese ontology topics and in turn the collective cultural discourse. It reveals ameans by which new media can be organized with a responsiveness to differences ofethnicity and culture, traced even to the very languages spoken [Whorf(1940)].As Tribal Peace was intended to be a web-based project accessible across thereservations, engaging the project committee in the process of visually designingand leading the outreach process was important. A key aspect of this was todetermine a metaphor that could drive Tribal Peace and energize the nativereservation members around a collective cultural theme. With this goal differentconcepts were discussed, and ultimately the theme of re-birth and revitalizationemerged. It was important for the community to work with a metaphor that waspresent within their natural environment yet also embody the theme of re-birth. Weexplored different images, such as fire, ocean, animals, and so on, but the metaphorthat resonated strongest according to Shonta was the tree. The Manzanita tree inparticular can be found across the landscape of the region, and emerges in localcultural mythologies across the reservations. It was a natural choice to utilize this, areal tree with symbolic importance, as the project interface. The submissions bycommunity members therefore appear on the branches of the Manzanita tree.15Figure 5: Composite Interface Metaphor: Manzanita treeExploiting a cross-reservation internet infrastructure, Tribal Peace attempts toconnect a displaced and fragmented community around shared information. Whilethis is not focused around the global scale of diaspora, the networked character andpotentials are similar. As a bottom-up project, submissions are created and ownedby individuals across the reservations. The project emerges from the ethnographicprocess and via the leadership of community members across lateralized structuresof power. Therefore, the project committee does not just feature tribal chairmen, butalso members of casinos, educators, and so on.However, to truly enable the community to serve as the articulator and owner of amedia system, the issue of databases must be re-encountered, and within a mannerthat moves away from the top-down, formal logic-type models described earlier viathe Dublin Core and other examples. In essence, creating a mapping between thecultural priorities and the database representations of content is the system unlocksthe question of ontology, and whose ontology drives the system. The challenge hereis of mapping a cultural discourse to an organization of databases, a question which Ihave been concerned with in previous and ongoing research [Srinivasan(2005),Srinivasan and Huang(2005), Srinivasan(2006)]. I have observed that this elicitationmust be humanistic, ethnographic, and truly in the hands of community members.16How they wish to map and conceive of their own cultural priorities, temporalities,and spatialities, must be their own choice and not placed into a pre-decidedtemplate. The creation of emergent databases [Turnbull(2004)] would then be atechnical challenge that would follow from the cultural mapping process.I discuss further details of my time on these reservations in other publications[Srinivasan(2006)], but wish to point out that the ethnographic process of engagingthe community, presenting my research and personae, and ultimately receiving theembrace that manifested itself into a digital media system, is a key element of thisresearch [Srinivasan(2005)]. This has involved the understanding that thedevelopment of the information system accompanies and progresses reflexivelybased on the ethnographic process [Hammersley(1992)]. The time spent withmedicine people, political leaders (chairmen), educational representatives, andbusiness owners all manifested itself into the development of Tribal Peace. I believethat conceiving the creation of the media system as rooted within the ethnographicprocess enables Tribal Peace to serve as a useful contrast to the systems andtheories articulated earlier in this paper. Indeed, in the spirit of Turner and Michaels,Tribal Peace is a project that has focused on deploying and designing media that hasemerged out of the navigation of the social and cultural geography of the nativereservations. This has occurred through the social deployment of the project, selfrepresentation through story creation and video-making, and via the ontologies anddatabase representations of the community’s aggregated content.System Impact and EvaluationsHow has Tribal Peace impacted the social, educational, political developments acrossthe communities? And how can this impact be understood within the context of 8months of system usage wherein data was gathered? (Tribal Peace debuted in April,2004 and evaluations are gathered from January, 2005).I have found a strong connection between usage patterns and particular months thatfeatured concentrated ethnography and relationship-building between myself andreservation members. I have found that the presence and active outreach within thetribal social geography has had a statistically significant impact on any dimensions ofsystem usage. These metrics include number of stories viewed, diversity of queriesand stories, number of comments left, and number of user sessions. The quantitativedata have shown a gradual growth in system usage as a function of time butultimately a strong correlation with the ethnographic period. The question this resultraises is at what time scale a system like Tribal Peace can be truly evaluated. If selfsustainability is to be reached, it would entail a significantly lower correlation withthe time spent by the ethnographer. Therefore, the quantitative data paints a clearlesson that can be captured through words, that a technology’s ability to impact acommunity is subject to accompanying social and cultural processes.The impact of the system, however, cannot solely be considered in terms of thisquantitative data. Given that data was collected within an incubatory period, much ofTribal Peace’s benefits lie in its potential to engage community infrastructures (suchas schools, political and cultural institutions, etc.) in the long term. I have observedperiodic use of the system in the on-reservation secondary schools, particularlyduring Native Culture, History, and Politics sections. Additionally, the system hasbeen used in occasional meetings to allow political leaders to access the variety ofvoices of their peoples. Finally, the system has been advocated by other outsideinstitutions and individuals who maintain strong relationship with the tribes. Thisincludes faculty from UC San Diego’s Department of Ethnic Studies, and directors17from San Diego’s Museum of Man and the Smithsonian’s National Museum of theAmerican Indian.Looking to Future ConvergencesThe Tribal Peace example is intended to demonstrate the potential of developing newmedia systems for communities that utilize digital networks and culturally-authoreddatabases. This research acknowledges that new media systems and videotechnologies can elicit and shape cultural ontologies that in turn impact the potentialfor communities to preserve, share information, and develop collectiveinfrastructures. Two important issues continue to stand out:(1) Globalization of the Tribal Peace method: How would the localized processdescribed briefly in the context of Tribal Peace apply when working withmultiple diaspora across different global spaces? Will the bridging efforts ofTribal Peace with 19 dispersed, but semi-local reservations, apply across suchgreat distances?(2) Eliciting truly culturally-articulated ontologies: The ontology diagramdemonstrated in Figure 7 was created by the project committee, but is it trulyrepresentative and indicative of the basic conceptions by which these nativenations represent and classify the world? Researchers have revealed, forexample, that aboriginal notions of history, time, and geography areincommensurable with Western rationalistic knowledge systems. How couldsuch an ethno-media project as Tribal Peace function within this setting? Thisis the enquiry of current ongoing research [Boast, Bravo, andSrinivasan(2006)].As future research continues to explore these questions, the barriers betweencultural difference and information/media technology will continue to erode and inturn a continued trajectory of ethno-media research will uncover new empoweringpotential uses of technology within the ethnic and indigenous realm.ReferencesAnderson, Benedict (1991). Imagined Communities: reflections on the origin andspread of nationalism. London/New York: Verso (1991).Anderson, Jon (1995). New Creoles of the Information Superhighway, AnthropologyToday 11(4): 13-15.Anderson, Jon (1997). Cybernauts of the Arab Diaspora: Electronic Mediation inTransnational Cultural Identities. Prepared for Couch-Stone symposium, PostmodernCulture, Global Capitalism, and Democratic Action, University of Maryland. April,1997.Appadurai, Arjun (1998), Disjuncture and Difference in the Global Cultural Economy,pp. 27-47. In: Modernity at Large Cultural Dimensions of Globalization. Minneapolis:University of Minnesota Press, 1998.Bakker, Piet (2001). "New nationalism: The Internet crusade," Paper presented atthe International Studies Association Annual Convention, Chicago (20–24 February),at http://www.tamilnation.org/selfdetermination/nation/bakker.pdf.18Boast, R., Bravo, M. and Srinivasan, R (2006). Return to Babel: Emergent diversity,digital resources, and local knowledge, Information, Communication and Society,under review.Castles, Stephen and Davidson, Alistair (2000), Citizenship and migration:globalisation and the politics of belonging, With Alastair Davidson. London: Macmillan2000Chan, Brenda (2005). Imagining the Homeland: The Internet and DiasporicDiscourse of Nationalism. Journal of Communication Inquiry 29(4), Sage PublicationsDigital Divide Network – www.digitaldividenetwork.orgFoucault, M. (1978). The history of sexuality. Vol. 1: Introduction. New York:Vintage.Gilliland-Swetland, Anne J. (2005) "Management of Electronic Records," reviewarticle for ARIST, v. 39Ginsburg, F., Abu-Lughod, L., and Larkin, B. (2002). Media Worlds: Anthropology onNew Terrain, University of California Press, California, 2002Gladney, Dru (2003). "Cyber–Separatism and Uyghur ethnic nationalism in China,"Center for Strategic and International Studies (5 June)Goody, Jack, and Ian Watt. (1968) "The consequences of literacy." In Literacy inTraditional Societies. Edited by Jack Goody. London: Cambridge University Press,1968Hall, S. (1973). Encoding/decoding. In Centre for Contemporary Cultural Studies(ed.) Culture, Media, Language: Working papers in cultural studies, 1972-1979(pp.128-138). London: HutchinsonHammersley, M. (1992). What's wrong with ethnography? Methodologicalexplorations. New York: Routledge.Hartley, John and Mckee, Alan. (2000) The indigenous public sphere : the reportingand reception of Aboriginal issues in the Australian media . Oxford : OxfordUniversity Press, 2000.Hewlett-Packard Tribal Digital Village Initiative Document: http://www.hp.com/einclusion/en/project/tribal1.htmlHo, K.C., Babeer, Z., and Khondker, H. (2002). “Sites” of resistance: Alternativewebsites and state-society relations. British Journal of Sociology. 53(1), 127-48Horkheimer, M., and Adorno, T.W. (1976). Dialectic of Enlightenment. New York:ContinuumHunter Jane, and Lagoze, Carl (2001). Combining RDF and XML Schemas to EnhanceInteroperability between Metadata Application Profiles. Proceedings of the Tenth19International World Wide Web Conference, WWW 10, Hong Kong, China, May 1-5,2001. ACM, ISBN 1-58113-348-0 and http://www10.org/cdrom/start.htmJenkins, H. (1992) Textual Poachers: Television Fans & Participatory Culture, NewYork: Routledge, Chapman and Hall, Inc.Kanat, Kilic (2005). Ethnic media and politics: The case of the use ofthe Internet by Uyghur diaspora. First Monday. 10(7).Kwok, K.W. (1999). Globalisation and Singapore transmigration: Re-imagining andnegotiating national identityLord, Alfred (1960). The singer of tales. New York, NY. Atheneum Press.Michaels, Eric. (1994) Bad Aboriginal art : tradition, media, and technologicalhorizons / Eric Michaels ; Minneapolis : University of Minnesota Press, c1994.Miller, D. and Slater, D. (2000). The Internet: An ethnographic approach. Oxford,UK: New York. Berg.Mitra, A. (1997). Virtual commonality: Looking for India on the Internet. In (Ed.Steve Jones), Virtual Culture. Newbury Park: SAGE.Morley, D. (1992). Television, audiences, and cultural studies. London: Routledge.Morley, D., and Robins, K. (1995). Spaces of identity: Global media, electroniclandscapes and cultural boundaries. London: Routledge.National Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA) (1999), USDepartment of Commerce (1999) Falling Through the Net: Defining the DigitalDivide. Washington DC: NTIA (available via:http://www.ntia.doc.gov/ntiahome/fttn99/)National Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA) (2000), USDepartment of Commerce (2000) NTIA Annual Report, 2000. Washington DC: NTIA(available via: http://www.ntia.doc.gov/ntiahome/2001/2000annrpt.htm)Oldenburg, Ray. (1989). The Great Good Places: Cafés, Coffee Shops, Bookstores,Bars, Hair Salons and Other Hangouts at the Heart of a Community. New York:Marlow & Company.Ong, Walter J. (1988). Orality and literacy : the technologizing of the word / WalterJ. Ong. Published/distributed: London ; New York : Routledge, 1988, c1982.Prins, Harald (2002). “Visual Media and the Primitivism Perplex: Colonial Fantasies,Indigenous Imagination, and Advocacy in North America” in Media Worlds:20Anthropology on New Terrain eds Ginsburg, Abu-Lughod, and Larkin, University ofCalifornia Press, 2002.Putnam, Robert (2000). Bowling Alone. New York, NY. Simon & Schuster Inc.Safran, W. (1991). Diasporas in modern societies: Mythos of homeland and return.Diaspora, 1(1), 83-99Sassen, Saskia (1999). Electronic Space and Power, In Giving Ground: the Politics ofPropinquity ed. Sorkin, and Copjec. , London. Verso.Spradley, James P. (1980). Participant Observation : New York : Holt, Rinehart andWinston, c1980.Srinivasan, R. (2006). Ethnomethodological Architectures – Information SystemsDriven by Cultural and Community Visions, Journal of the American Society ofInformation Science and Technology, in press.Srinivasan, R. (2006).Where Information Society and Community Voice Intersect,The Information Society, under reviewSrinivasan, R. and Huang, Jeffrey (2005).: Fluid ontologies for digital museums. Int.J. on Digital Libraries 5(3): 193-204 (2005)Srinivasan, R. (2005). Weaving Spatial, Digital, and Ethnographic Processes inCommunity-driven Media Design. Doctoral Dissertation, Harvard UniversitySrinivasan, R. (2002). Village Voice: Expressing Narrative through Communitydesigned Ontologies, M.S thesis, Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyTekwani, Shyam (2003). "The Tamil diaspora, Tamil militancy, and the Internet," In:K.C. Ho, Randolph Kluver, and Kenneth C.C. Yang (editors). Asia.com: Asiaencounters the Internet. New York: RoutledgeCurzon, pp. 175–192.Turnbull, David. (2004). Performative and Propositional Knowledges: NicheConstruction, Contingency, Emergence, Multiplicity, and the Implications forReconceiving Knowledge. In the Proceedings of 4S/EASST 2004, Paris, France.Turner, Terrence (1992). "Defiant Images: the Kayapo Appropriation of Video,"Anthropology Today 1992:8.6: 5-16.Virilio, Paul (1995). Speed & Information: Cyberspace Alarm! Eds. Kroker, Arthurand Marilouise, www.ctheory.net/text_file?pick=72Wellman, Barry and Milena Gulia. (1999). Net-Surfers Don’t Ride Alone: VirtualCommunities as Communities. Pp. 331-366 in Networks in the Global Village, editedby Barry Wellman. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.