Rural development in the digital age: A systematic literature review
on unequal ICT availability, adoption, and use in rural areas
Koen Salemink a, *
, Dirk Strijker a
, Gary Bosworth b
a Cultural Geography Department, Faculty of Spatial Sciences, University of Groningen, PO Box 800, 9700 AV Groningen, The Netherlands
b University of Lincoln, Lincoln Business School, Brayford Pool, Lincoln LN6 7TS, UK
article info
Article history:
Received 23 April 2014
Received in revised form
10 August 2015
Accepted 10 September 2015
Available online 26 September 2015
Keywords:
Rural development
Digital divide
Digital inclusion
Rural penalty
Next generation access
abstract
This paper presents a systematic review of 157 papers on digital developments and rural development in
advanced countries. It focuses on the general conclusions, in order to better understand the potential
impacts of the coming Next Generation Access revolution. We distinguish two major strands of research:
connectivity research and inclusion research. In the connectivity theme, the conclusion is that there are
persistent and growing differences in data infrastructure quality between urban and rural areas. Public
policies to promote the availability or improvement of data infrastructure are essentially responsive, and
rapidly outdated by market developments. For inclusion, the hampered diffusion of technologies, and the
lower average levels of education and skills in rural areas have a negative impact on adoption and use.
Generic policies in this field neglect specific local needs. The paradox is that rural communities are most
in need of improved digital connectivity to compensate for their remoteness, but they are least connected
and included. Future research should therefore focus on specific places and communities e
combining both connectivity and inclusion issues e in order to inform ‘customized policies’ for poorly
connected and digitally excluded rural communities.
© 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
Rural communities have been struggling to keep up with developments
in digital connectivity (Malecki, 2003; Strover, 2003;
Velaga et al., 2012). At the end of the twentieth century, a great
deal of governmental and market effort was expended in advanced
western societies in order to upgrade rural telephone networks for
use by the Internet (Cambini and Jiang, 2009; Holt and Galligan,
2013). This undertaking was founded on the idea that all regions
and communities should have access to the Internet in order to
prevent growing regional disparities (see for example Cornford and
Gillespie, 1993). Telephony was regarded as a utility, which ensured
that (state) companies would invest in rural networks as well.
Upgrading these networks for Internet use followed a similar track
(Malecki, 2003; Cambini and Jiang, 2009).
Today, accessing the Internet through telephone lines is only
one of several technologies available. Cable Internet, fiber optics,
and mobile broadband are now all widely available, except in rural
areas (Whitacre and Mills, 2010; Townsend et al., 2013). More
recent technologies which go beyond telephone lines have not (yet)
been regarded as utilities, so governments have not been able to
promote their universal provision in the same way, and considerable
investments are needed if this is to change (Ragoobar et al.,
2011). Furthermore, in terms of speed and reliability, these forms
of Next Generation Access (NGA) are now rapidly developing in the
areas where they are already available. Differences between the
well-served, largely urban areas and the underserved, mainly rural
areas are therefore growing, resulting in a spatial digital divide
(Townsend et al., 2013). Malecki (2003) positions the lack of
availability of, and thus access to, data infrastructure and its high
costs in the broader context of a general lack of service provision in
rural areas as compared to urban areas. Malecki (2003: 201) frames
this as ‘the rural penalty’ (see also Hite, 1997), meaning that people
in rural areas ‘pay a price’ for living in remote areas, which affects
many different economic sectors and social groups (Woods, 2005;
Bosworth, 2010; Velaga et al., 2012; Stockdale and MacLeod, 2013).
However, it is not just the technologies that are rapidly changing.
In addition to the material issues that rural communities face in
the digital age, there are also issues of a social nature. The adoption
and use of the Internet and associated applications are becoming
* Corresponding author. increasingly diverse, and digital inclusion is no longer regarded as a
E-mail address: k.salemink@rug.nl (K. Salemink).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Journal of Rural Studies
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jrurstud
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jrurstud.2015.09.001
0743-0167/© 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Journal of Rural Studies 54 (2017) 360e371
binary issue. In other words, the debate is no longer about ‘haves’
and ‘have nots’ (Kilpelainen and Sepp € €
anen, 2014; Marien and €
Prodnik, 2014); instead, it has started to focus on the degree of
usage and different usage patterns. There is increasing recognition
of the complexity of digital inclusion (see also Gilbert, 2010;
Helsper, 2012). In order to understand the impact of digital connectivity,
one must also understand the actual usage. Providing the
connectivity and technology is just one aspect of keeping up with
developments; adoption and actual usage are the next steps that
need to be taken in order for digital connectivity to have an impact
(Hage et al., 2013).
Since the introduction of the Internet to the consumer market,
researchers from various disciplines have shown interest in the
causes and consequences of this urban-rural divide, resulting in a
large and growing body of literature. However, the topical issues for
rural development are commonly discussed within (sub)disciplines,
resulting in a somewhat fragmented debate. This paper will
therefore adopt a transdisciplinary approach in order to provide a
timely overview of the research in this field so far, with a focus on
advanced western countries. For comparability reasons, we will
only include the literature on these countries. The impact of ICT
developments in rural areas will never be identical, but, by
excluding the literature on developing and transitional countries,
the differences in development trajectories are minimized. This
overview has been created through a systematic literature review,
based on key themes drawn from the debates on digital developments
in relation to rural development.
Two questions are addressed by this systematic literature review:
1) What general insights and conclusions can we extract from
previous research on rural areas in the age of digitalization? 2) How
can these contribute to setting a new research agenda for better
understanding the impacts of rapid technological developments?
By answering these questions, we will contribute to the future
research agenda, and we will provide recommendations for future
policy in order to contribute towards bridging the spatial digital
divide between the urban and the rural.
The outline of the paper is as follows. Section 2 provides a
background on digital rural development, based on a pilot literature
review. In section 3, the outline of the systematic search and
review is discussed. Sections 4 and 5 discuss the observations and
conclusions of the selected papers as to the role of ICTs in rural
development, and we will end by summarizing these in terms of an
overview of the field. Section 6 presents the overall conclusions and
its implications, and it proposes a future agenda for research and
policy.
2. Towards a framework for a systematic literature review
Generally, the literature in this field has shown that e in order to
actively take part in a digitalizing information society e data infrastructures
such as DSL, cable (coax), fiber optics, or mobile
broadband need to be available at a reasonable price. However,
lower densities and greater distances in rural areas discourage the
market from investing in new technologies (Malecki, 2003). More
recent literature suggests that rural areas are increasingly found at
the wrong end of a ‘digital divide’ (Skerratt et al., 2012; Townsend
et al., 2013). Urban areas are the digital ‘hot spots’ where highspeed
Internet infrastructure is ubiquitous, while rural areas tend
to be dependent on low-tech Internet access, with lower speeds
and less reliable connections (Skerratt, 2010; Skerratt et al., 2012).
This was the case with cable Internet access, which in the
Netherlands for example, was never deployed in rural areas outside
the curtilage of villages (Nucciarelli et al., 2010). Currently, history is
repeating itself with other so-called Next Generation Access networks
(NGA) such as fiber optics (Townsend et al., 2013). The
market is assumed to deliver these NGA's to high-density urban
areas eventually e even though some urban premises are still
awaiting this delivery (see for example Ofcom, 2014). This is,
however, less straightforward for rural areas, in which the backbone
infrastructure is often still inadequate (European Commission,
2013). In its regulatory framework, the EU defines three categories
of market areas: fully served ‘black areas’ with market competition,
less served ‘grey areas’ with at least one provider but limited
competition, and underserved ‘white areas’ without market
competition (Sadowski et al., 2009; European Commission, 2013).
Rural areas are mostly white areas, or grey at best. Even though
government support is legally permitted in white and grey areas,
this has not resulted in improved digital connectivity in European
rural areas (Sadowski et al., 2009: 585).
Research into disparities in digital development often departs
from the context of the network society, using the seminal work of
Castells (2000) as a starting point. Urban and rural areas are viewed
as interconnected parts of networks in which both production and
consumption takes place (Lichter and Brown, 2011). The flow of
information is becoming increasingly important within these networks
(O'Hara and Stevens, 2006; Malecki, 2010), making all forms
of connections and communications increasingly valuable. Economic
and social developments are under pressure due to a lack of
digital connectivity, impeding innovation of production processes
and certain forms of consumption, and in essence excluding some
rural communities from fully participating in the contemporary
information society (Velaga et al., 2012; Kilpelainen and Sepp € €
anen,
2014; Roberts and Townsend, 2015).
Following the vulnerable position of rural communities in times
of upscaling of services and digitalization, LaRose et al. (2007; 2011)
state that, paradoxically, the problem of physical remoteness and
the inadequate service provision could for a large part be solved by
promoting digital connectivity as a substitute for many of those
services. Remote rural areas especially lack the required digital
connectivity, however: a deadlocked situation that increases the
risk of rural areas falling even further behind in terms of accessibility
to services.
Researchers from various academic disciplines, including economics,
IT, geography, planning, and the political sciences are
engaged in researching the (potential) impact of unequal provision,
adoption, and the use of ICTs. Many sub-topics are studied in-depth,
resulting in a growing but somewhat fragmented body of mainly
specialist literature that evades the overarching issue of the broader
impact of a lack of digital developments for rural areas.
Recently, overview papers on the impact of digitalization on the
economy and society have added to the debate, but they do not
focus on rural areas. Some consider the consequences of digitalization
for participation in the traditional ‘offline’ society, with a
focus on urban issues (see Gilbert, 2010), while others disregard the
spatial aspects of the problem (for example Cambini and Jiang,
2009; Helsper, 2012). Digital developments in rural areas are discussed
in some specialist policy papers, but the focus on policy
means that specific rural problems remain undiscussed (for
example Holt and Galligan, 2013). This paper fills the rural gap by
providing a systematic literature review on digital developments
and their consequences for rural areas in advanced western
countries.
3. Methodology
Although overview papers are scarce in the field of telecommunications
and rural development, there are papers from related
disciplines, which give an overview of the literature within their
field, such as Holt and Galligan (2013) on U.S. federal universal
service programs for telecommunications, and Cambini and Jiang
K. Salemink et al. / Journal of Rural Studies 54 (2017) 360e371 361
(2009) on broadband investment and regulation. Building on these
approaches to providing an extensive overview of the literature, we
will first describe how we created this overview in order to make
our search queries and results reproducible. Therefore, in this
section we will describe the search strategy, the selection criteria
for papers, and the coding system we used for our analysis.
3.1. Conducting a systematic literature search
The systematic search is conducted with key words and concepts
from academic disciplines dealing with inequalities in ICT
availability and adoption, along with rural development issues.
Together these key words constitute the theme of this paper. Based
on the concepts and vocabulary which is used in the literature from
geography, sociology, economics, and communications/telecommunications
studies, as identified from a preliminary study of the
main debates (see section 2), the following terms were selected for
search queries to cover the ICT and digital component of our
research question: “ICT,” “digital,” “digitalization,” “telecommunications,”
“information technology,” “broadband,” “NGA,” “telecommuting,”
“digital divide,” “digital inequalities,” and
“information society.” To cover the rural component of the research
question, we used: “rural development,” “rural areas,” “remote
area,” “regional development,” and “countryside.” Searching with
combinations of these 11 ICT and 5 rural terms generated a total of
55 search queries.
The databases ‘EconLit’ and ‘Web of Science’ were used, because
they cover the cross-disciplinary scope of this paper. ‘EconLit,’ includes
papers from over 1700 journals in economics and related
disciplines, and is managed by the American Economic Association
(https://www.aeaweb.org/econlit/index.php). ‘Web of Science,’
which is maintained by Thomson Reuters, includes over 12000
journals and combines several indexing databases from various
disciplines, including IT and engineering, but also social sciences,
arts, and humanities (http://thomsonreuters.com/thomsonreuters-web-of-science/).
A paper was included in the results if it was a) dealing with
advanced western countries, and b) published in an Englishlanguage
peer-reviewed academic journal. The queries for the
Web of Science database were narrowed down after the initial results
of the search were retrieved, because of its broad scope and
variety of selected academic disciplines. This broader scope resulted
in an abundance of mostly irrelevant e in terms of our topic e
papers, such as remote sensing and crop development. The Web of
Science search queries therefore were refined by only selecting the
academic disciplines relevant for this paper, i.e. those dealing with
digitalization issues in rural areas. Through this selection, we
mainly excluded papers on developing countries and technological
evaluation of remote sensing applications, for which the rural was
merely a technology laboratory.
The search was executed and finished in September 2013. The
55 search queries identified 4409 potential papers. Eventually, 157
papers met the criteria of dealing with advanced western countries
and being published in English-language, peer-reviewed academic
journals. Recent policy documents and literature are used
throughout the paper in order to position the paper's findings in
the ongoing and developing debate.
3.2. Coding framework: connectivity and inclusion
For the analysis of the selected papers, we created a coding
framework. This framework was created through induction. Instead
of predefining the set of codes, we extracted them from our dataset
(the papers), with similarities in research themes and perspectives
as a basis. From the dataset of 157 papers, two main themes were
identified, with four and three subthemes, respectively.
If a paper touched on more than one perspective, the code for
the paper was based on which perspective and findings were
emphasized in the conclusions. This is in line with the aim of this
paper to extract general lessons from the debate so far. Although all
the papers selected have been coded, not every paper is referred to
in the text of the analysis, for readability reasons. The full bibliography,
available at http://www.rug.nl/staff/k.salemink/RefListSystematic-Literature-Review.pdf,
shows the papers selected.
One main theme deals with connectivity issues: to what extent
places and regions are digitally connected and thereby derive
economic benefits. This theme has a strong supply-side perspective
and corresponds to the debate on material inequalities and the
digital divide (Livingstone and Helsper, 2007). This theme is
further divided into four subthemes: telecommunications markets,
technologies in rural areas, regional development, and policy and
regulation (see Table 1 for sections, numbers of papers, and
timeframe).
The other main theme consists of papers that deal with inclusion
issues. This has a demand side and people-oriented focus, corresponding
to the digital inequalities and digital inclusion debate in
communication studies, geography, sociology, and urban studies
(Livingstone and Helsper, 2007). These papers deal with the
question of the extent to which people have the knowledge, attitudes,
skills, and aspirations to be included in digital rural society.
This theme is further divided into three subthemes: diffusion theory,
digital inequalities, and digital inclusion policy (see Table 2 for sections,
numbers of papers, and time frame).
4. Lessons from the connectivity literature
4.1. Connectivity
The papers described under the main theme of ’connectivity’ are
those dealing with material issues of the connectivity of places,
regions, and in some cases households. These papers research the
differences in availability of different telecommunication technologies
and the mechanisms behind this. Although the search was not
restricted to economic development, we found that connectivity
research strongly focuses on this. Internet and ICTs facilitate the
transfer of information (Malecki, 2010), and therefore they are
regarded as production factors for productivity gains (Tu and Sui,
2011) and economic growth (Van Gaasbeck, 2008; Martínez and
Rodríguez, 2009), either for places or individual businesses.
Research on connectivity in rural areas mainly focuses on the
lack of digital connectivity in rural areas, which in the literature is
referred to as the digital divide, urban-rural divide, or rural digital
divide (Townsend et al., 2013). Nearly every household in
advanced western societies is connected through a telephone line
and, therefore, has the possibility of a fixed Internet connection. A
recent communication from the European Commission (2013) and
an Ofcom report (2014) show that differences in connectivity are
growing, especially between urban and rural areas. The rise in
deployment of Next Generation Access networks in urban areas,
with greater speeds and better reliability, make these differences
ever more prominent. Mobile phone coverage and mobile broadband
show similar disparities (Townsend et al., 2013). In this light,
we define a lack of connectivity as the comparatively disadvantaged
state of connectivity of places and regions, in respect to the
overall connectivity status and developments in the surrounding
context, i.e. the level of connectivity of rural areas compared to
urban areas.
Below we will discuss the following subthemes of connectivity
separately: telecommunications markets, technologies in rural
areas, regional development, and policy and regulation.
362 K. Salemink et al. / Journal of Rural Studies 54 (2017) 360e371
4.2. Telecommunications markets (13 papers)
The basis of a lack of digital connectivity in rural areas lies in the
market for telecommunications. Privatization policies regarding
telecommunication companies and deregulation of the markets in,
for example, the United States (Holt and Galligan, 2013) and
countries in the EU (Cambini and Jiang, 2009) have made economic
market rationale the dominant assessment framework for investments
in networks. In practice, there are often spatial or national
monopolies, or oligopolies at best (Valletti, 2003; Atkinson,
2011). Deploying networks to rural areas, i.e. establishing connections
over long distances in areas with low population density,
makes these rural areas high-cost markets with little opportunity
for telecommunications companies to achieve economies of scale
or obtain a return on investment (Grubesic, 2010; Glass and
Stefanova, 2010, 2012).
Latent demand and ‘rural potential’ have been mapped in the
past (see for example Madden et al., 2000), but more recent literature
argues that this will not affect the investment behavior of the
companies (Mack and Grubesic, 2009). Even if rural areas are
profitable for telecommunications companies, urban areas offer
still higher returns on investment (Grubesic and Murray, 2004).
This makes rural areas less attractive markets and perpetuates the
urban focus of market decisions (Oyana, 2011). The market for
telecommunications shows that a free-market rationale can ensure
an efficient use of limited resources, i.e. using the resources for
profitable markets in high-density areas, but it cannot ensure an
equal delivery of services in all areas, leaving the rural underserved
(Gabe and Abel, 2002; Malecki, 2003, 2004; Grubesic, 2003;
Grubesic and Murray, 2004; Oyana, 2011).
The lack of provision of digital connectivity is in line with other
rural service provisions, where the economies of scale of the free
market lead to rural disadvantages or even a rural penalty (Hite,
1997; Malecki, 2003). However, the telecommunications market
is different from other markets for rural service provision, such as
the post office or a pub. On the supply side, the complexity and high
costs of deploying and managing telecommunications networks
form a barrier to entry into the market (Grubesic and Murray,
2004). On the demand side, consumers require connections for
both household and business activities. Therefore, such connections
have to be provided to a specific household or business,
instead of to a single shop or hub in a village. Nowadays, digital
connectivity is becoming just as important as other utilities, such as
gas, water, and electricity. Up to now, the market has failed to
supply this utility of the digital age (11 papers in this subtheme),
and in the end it could prove necessary for governments to intervene
in order to achieve universal access (see also Holt and
Galligan, 2013).
EU regulations (Cambini and Jiang, 2009) and US federal policies
(Holt and Galligan, 2013) focus on safeguarding a free market for
telecommunications, while stimulating investment in unattractive
markets. Governments have taken various approaches to ensure
Internet provision for all, but to date this has not solved the problem
of unequal availability and choice (Cambini and Jiang, 2009;
Atkinson, 2011).
4.3. Technologies in rural areas (13 papers)
Since the development of ICTs and networks in the late 1980s,
researchers have been concerned with the variety of technologies,
their costs, and their availability (see for example Egan, 1992). The
main concern of the literature we found involves the lack of
availability and the resulting technological constraints in rural
areas (see Section 4.2). Although society increasingly assumes the
availability of advanced ICTs and networks, underserved rural areas
are still experiencing problems in obtaining and retaining access to
goods and services such as eHealth (Steele and Lo, 2013) and
transport (Velaga et al., 2012) due to bandwidth constraints. When
it comes to the availability of the latest technologies, rural areas
universally find themselves in the same situation, that of continuously
catching up with urban areas (Malecki and Boush, 2003;
Grubesic, 2006, 2008).
Ellershaw et al. (2009) discuss the recent technological trend of
providing wireless broadband in rural areas as a substitute for
wired broadband, concluding that the need for a fiber optic backbone
(wired) to deploy wireless broadband leads to only small
differences in deployment costs compared to fixed broadband. As a
result, here too, rural areas are at the high-cost end of the market.
With rural areas being high-cost markets as compared to urban
areas, and thus remaining underserved, investments in new technologies
and innovations will continue to take place in urban areas
(see also Velaga et al., 2012: 105e106). Newly developed technologies
are likely to be urban-led and based on ubiquitous connectivity,
designed without consideration for rural needs. This
dominant and largely urban rationale leads to the perpetuation of
the urban-rural digital divide.
4.4. Regional development (25 papers)
As computing and digital connectivity became more and more
important aspects of society in the late 1980s and early 1990s, researchers
showed increasing interest in the regional economic
development effects stemming from these, as shown in the ‘technology’
subtheme. Goddard and Gillespie (1986), Cornford and
Gillespie (1993), Tsiligirides (1993), Cronin et al. (1995), and
Capello and Nijkamp (1996) attempted to theoretically assess the
implications of the coming digital age, envisioning a major role for
advanced telecommunication technologies in future rural and
regional development. Together with the influential work of
Castells (2000), these early works set the tone for the debate in the
field of regional development in terms of the role of advanced
Table 1
Connectivity subthemes characteristics.
Connectivity
4.2 Telecommunications Markets
n ¼ 13
2000e2012
4.3 Technologies in Rural Areas
n ¼ 13
1992e2013
4.4 Regional Development
n ¼ 25
1986e2013
4.5 Policy and Regulation
n ¼ 32
1997e2012
Table 2
Inclusion subthemes characteristics.
Inclusion
5.2 Diffusion Theory
n ¼ 27
2000e2013
5.3 Digital Inequalities
n ¼ 31
2000e2013
5.4 Digital Inclusion Policy
n ¼ 16
2000e2013
K. Salemink et al. / Journal of Rural Studies 54 (2017) 360e371 363
telecommunication technologies. The main question in this debate
in regional development is whether the availability of advanced
telecommunications leads to a decrease or an increase in economic
differences between places and regions (see for example Lentz and
Oden, 2001; Malecki, 2003). The literature concludes that economic
differences between well-connected and poorly connected regions
will grow, mainly due to a lack of (instant) access to information
and the limited possibility for proactively taking part in the production
of information (14 papers).
Other literature concerning regional development discusses
what precedes the possibility of growth: Are poorer regions capable
of becoming digitally connected at all (Lera-Lopez and Bill  on-
Curras, 2005  ), and, if they are connected, do economic growth
patterns develop in the same way as in advanced regions (Martínez
and Rodríguez, 2009)? This issue is linked to European Union
Cohesion Policy and the Digital Agenda (European Commission,
2013), and the attempts to determine whether there are similarities
in problems concerning digital connectivity in the different
member states. In poorer regions there is a cumulative causality:
These regions suffer from a lack of connections, as a result of which
regional development becomes constrained, and then regional
disparities further increase (Lera-Lopez and Bill  on-Curr  as, 2005  ).
Over the years, these insights have contributed to an increasingly
important role for ICTs and the Internet in European Cohesion
Policy, connecting rural economies more strongly to urban centers
and providing productivity advantages for rural businesses
(European Commission, 2013). Furthermore, improved digital
connectivity can help attracting human capital into these rural
areas (see also Roberts and Townsend, 2015).
There is also literature concerning the measurable economic
impact of digital connectivity. The general conclusion is that
advanced telecommunication technologies contribute to GDP
growth through investment in the infrastructure itself and through
productivity improvement (Ford and Koutsky, 2005; Van Gaasbeck,
2008; Capello et al., 2011; Greenstein and McDevitt, 2011; Forman
et al., 2012; Kolko, 2012; Prieger, 2013). Some papers, however, note
that e although advanced telecommunication technologies do
contribute to GDP growth e this growth is unevenly distributed
over core and peripheral regions, that is, over urban and rural areas
(Kirschner, 2005; Tu and Sui, 2011). Even if digital connectivity in
rural areas improves and GDP grows, this does not automatically
mean that economic cohesion is taking place. Rural areas need to
grow faster than urban areas in order for economic cohesion to take
place.
In the case of entrepreneurial activity, the literature is inconclusive.
Although Ford and Koutsky (2005) observe that investments
in broadband lead to more entrepreneurial activity in a
region, Cumming and Johan, 2010, on the other hand, note that
digital connectivity in remote rural areas creates Internet-based
external competition for local entrepreneurs, such as e-retail,
which disadvantages the local entrepreneurs. This means that
improved access to markets can have a negative impact for traditional
rural business. However, innovative entrepreneurs may
respond positively to this competition, strengthening the rural
economy in the future. Comparison can be drawn here with other
modes of connectivity, such as road and rail, but this is outside the
scope of our findings (see also Lichter and Brown, 2011).
Gallardo and Scammahorn (2011) show that as the number of
broadband providers increases in a region, the number of noninnovative
entrepreneurs, from traditional sectors, also increases.
This does not mean that better digital connectivity leads to more
non-innovative entrepreneurs, but it does show the importance of
broadband for traditional industries. As Gallardo and Scammahorn
(2011: 114) state: “… innovative entrepreneurs are less likely to
start businesses in rural America (…) increasing broadband
availability will enhance the development of non-innovative
[traditional] entrepreneurs.” For rural areas in the US, this indicates
that better digital connectivity will not attract or increase
the amount of creative entrepreneurs; rather, it will support
existing industries. We did not find similar research in the European
context, but, considering the importance of commercial
counter-urbanization in the UK (Bosworth, 2010) as compared to
the US, and business diversification in rural areas in the
Netherlands (Markantoni et al., 2014), for example, it is debatable
whether the conclusions of Gallardo and Scammahorn also apply to
Europe.
The literature is also inconclusive when it comes to the role of
ICT in migration to rural areas in terms of being an economic driver.
Mahasuweerachai et al. (2010) conclude that digitally well-served
rural areas in the United States, i.e. those with more than one
broadband technology available, experience significant inmigration
as compared to rural areas without broadband.
Muhammad et al. (2007), on the other hand, conclude that in the
Netherlands digital connectivity enables people to commute over
longer distances. Through this, rural people potentially have access
to labor markets which are further away.
A general conclusion is that geographical and institutional
contexts do matter, so there is a potential for them to make a difference
as well. For economic growth to take place, however,
merely the provision of improved digital connectivity is not
enough, or as Tranos (2012) summarizes it, “digital infrastructure is
a necessary, but not a sufficient, condition for economic development”
(Tranos, 2012: 332).
4.5. Policy and regulation (32 papers)
Digital connectivity has been a prominent topic on policy
agendas for quite some time (see for example European
Commission, 2013; Holt and Galligan, 2013). The main aim of policy
programs has been to minimize regional disparities (see also
section 4.4). The policies concerning digital connectivity have
moved from the utility perspective of providing ‘a connection’ for
all, to providing Next Generation Access for all (European
Commission, 2013). The three pillars of stimulating universal and
equal access to either basic broadband or NGA are competition,
investment by government authorities, and regulation (Gulati and
Yates, 2012). Generally speaking, policies have been forced to
respond to the technological trends of advanced telecommunication
technologies (Gomez-Barroso and Feij  oo, 2012; Holt and
Galligan, 2013). For rural development, simply reacting to these
trends has not been enough, as the urban-rural digital divide shows
(see Section 4.4).
Much of the policy evaluation literature discusses the imperfections
or flaws in these policies (23 out of 32 papers), such as
Strover (2001), and Venkatachalam and McDowell, 2003 in terms
of the U.S. federal universal service programs, or Belloc et al. (2012),
and Gomez-Barroso and Feij  oo (2012)  in terms of European Commission
policy. Specifically, when it comes to the US federal universal
service programs (Telecommunications Act 1996), there is a
vast body of literature that discusses the effectiveness and efficacy
of policy measures and programs implemented so far: Often the
conclusion is that the Act and program do not deliver what they
should deliver (Strover, 2003; Whitacre and Mahasuweerachai,
2008; Kandilov and Renkow, 2010; Berg et al., 2011; Holt and
Galligan, 2013). Similarly inefficacious policies are found in European
countries, despite the variety of efforts to promote rural
connectivity - see for example Skerratt (2010) on Scotland and
Nucciarelli et al. (2010) on the Netherlands and Italy.
In addition to the literature on the federal US, EU, or national
levels, there is a strand of literature on municipal and county-level
364 K. Salemink et al. / Journal of Rural Studies 54 (2017) 360e371
policies. Local governments have attempted to get their communities
connected to advanced telecommunication technologies,
either through providing the capital for investments, or through
the formation of a public enterprise or partnership (Sadowski et al.,
2009; Nucciarelli et al., 2010; Troulos and Maglaris, 2011). North
American and Australian literature on this dates back to the
beginning of the 21st century (Youtie, 2000; Van Wart et al., 2000)
and researches the factors that determine the success of a local
government-initiated network. Conclusions suggest that supportive
policy throughout the local governmental organization is
required to get the locality online; unprofitable localities are very
likely unable to establish an economically self-sustaining network
(see also Simpson et al., 2004).
There has been specific attention for Canadian and Australian
indigenous communities. Due to the remoteness of their territory,
indigenous communities experience a severe lack of digital connectivity.
Policy initiatives to get these remotely living communities
connected to the wider world, require targeted approaches
that fit into indigenous community life. Without the support of the
communities, the provision of connectivity will have no impact,
and will be viewed as a top-down imposition (Ramírez, 2001;
2003; 2007).
The literature on local government policy in Europe focuses on
public private partnerships (PPP) for NGA networks in rural municipalities
within the broader EU policy framework of the Digital
Agenda and analyzes the different outcomes on the various national
levels (Sadowski et al., 2009; Falch and Henten, 2010;
Nucciarelli et al., 2010; Troulos and Maglaris, 2011; Ragoobar
et al., 2011). Under current EU policy and law, it is difficult to set
up a PPP that complies with European agreements concerning the
free market (Troulos and Maglaris, 2011). The role of governmental
bodies in PPPs is often challenged by commercial telecommunications
companies, who claim that governmental bodies should not
be acting as market parties and disrupting market mechanisms
(Sadowski et al., 2009). The EU legal framework now recognizes,
however, that in rural areas there often are no market initiatives,
which then justifies public participation in telecommunication
projects. It is moving towards a framework in which governmentinitiated
activities in underserved ‘white areas’ will not immediately
be forced to stop because of the prevailing interest of a free
market (Sadowski et al., 2009; European Commission, 2013).
To summarize, contemporary policy and regulation is now
aimed at stimulating places and regions to keep up with technological
developments. There are, however, places and regions in the
rural that have missed out on earlier developments. The main
challenge for future policy and regulation therefore is to make sure
that these lagging regions are served by the policies as well, and to
prevent these regions from falling even further behind. The objectives
of policy programs, e.g. providing a connection of a minimum
speed and capacity, are rapidly overtaken by developments in
the telecommunications sector itself (Nucciarelli et al., 2010;
Ragoobar et al., 2011). The responsive character of these policies,
up to now, has sustained the ‘catching up’ position of rural areas.
5. Lessons from the inclusion literature
5.1. Inclusion
The other main theme that arises from the papers is that of
inclusion. Where papers on connectivity focus on material inequalities
e in some cases from a somewhat dehumanized macroperspective
e inclusion research focuses on the social inequality
aspects of ICT developments and the extent to which people are
able to participate in the information society (Marien and Prodnik, €
2014). It researches the various factors and mechanisms behind the
adoption of ICTs, resulting in a degree of digital inclusion for people.
In addition to the availability aspect discussed in section 4,
knowledge, attitudes, skills, and the aspirations to use ICTs
(Helsper, 2012), along with the moment in time when people adopt
these e early or late adopters e (Rogers, 2003), determine the level
of inclusion into digital society.
In this section we will use the term ‘diffusion theory research’
for the research on the diffusion of ICTs through time and space
(Section 5.2). Research on digital knowledge, attitudes, skills, and
aspirations will be called ‘digital inequalities research’ (Section 5.3).
Finally, we will discuss the literature concerning policies that promote
the inclusion of digitally deprived people in rural areas into
the digital society, using the term ‘digital inclusion policy research’
(Section 5.4).
5.2. Diffusion theory research (27 papers)
Diffusion theory research studies the socioeconomic characteristics
of people with the aim of understanding how new technologies
and innovations spread through time and space (Rogers,
2003). There is a vast body of literature concerning the diffusion
of innovations and technologies in rural areas, and how this can be
accelerated, for example, by using extension programs (Rogers,
2003: 391e394). Diffusion theorists take an educational perspective
as to what the barriers are for people, firms, and organizations
in terms of adopting a new technology.
The literature we found follows Rogers (2003: 281), and studies
the characteristics of categories of ICT adopters, characterizing
them as early adopters, late adopters, or laggards. It is interested in
the extent to which (groups of) people experience barriers to
adopting new ICTs, even when these ICTs are considered by policy
makers as benefiting their everyday lives or businesses. Particular
barriers to adoption include a lack of financial resources, unemployment,
low educational levels and conservative attitudes
(Hollifield and Donnermeyer, 2003; Hilbert, 2011). This literature
goes beyond the urban-rural digital divide, and studies the
inequality in adoption and use within rural areas. A small strand of
largely descriptive literature provides overviews of ‘national states
of diffusion,’ together with the frequently identified factors that
determine adoption (Camagni and Capello, 2005; Whitacre, 2008;
Zolnierek and Clausen, 2010; Khatiwada and Pigg, 2010; Turk and
Trkman, 2012). Other literature takes a demand-side perspective
on how to determine which factors and processes can contribute to
creating more demand, and to promoting adoption of new technologies
(Hollifield et al., 2000; Hollifield and Donnermeyer, 2003;
Youtie et al., 2007; Turk et al., 2008; Howick and Whalley, 2008;
Whitacre and Mills, 2010; Peronard and Just, 2011; Rennie et al.,
2013; Hage et al., 2013). In general, people who adopt new technologies
at an early stage tend to recognize the benefits of these
new technologies for their everyday life, yet are also willing to
accept the associated risks (LaRose et al., 2007). Moreover, early
adopters in both urban and rural areas have usually had previous
experience with ICTs or broadband (Hollifield and Donnermeyer,
2003; Youtie et al., 2007; LaRose et al., 2007), suggesting that
there are also differences in adoption and diffusion within rural
areas. Diffusion theory literature also concludes that the most
important goal for future policies should be that of promoting the
adoption of new ICTs by people who are not interested (see for
example Howick and Whalley, 2008). Increasing the use of ICTs
among this group is most likely if these are seen as a means to an
end for these people (Peronard and Just, 2011) and if they fit within
the culture of a community (see for example Rennie et al., 2013; on
indigenous communities).
Other literature focuses on ICT adoption by firms and entrepreneurs.
Forman et al. (2005a; 2005b), and Goggins and Mascaro
K. Salemink et al. / Journal of Rural Studies 54 (2017) 360e371 365
(2013) emphasize the role of the distance of rural firms to central
market areas and of the remoteness of rural firm locations as a
dominant explanation as to why rural firms lag behind non-rural
firms in adopting new technologies. The diffusion theory literature
this paper addresses assumes that new technologies and innovations,
such as the Internet or smartphones, are first adopted in
central urban areas, which hold many highly educated people with
higher incomes who drive innovations (Whitacre, 2008). Eventually
these innovations reach remote areas at a later stage, or not at
all. Galloway and Mochrie (2005), on the other hand, conclude that
distance and remoteness are not the only explanatory factors. They
provide a more nuanced view of the unequal adoption of technologies,
one that arises from the differences in industries and sectors,
geographical context, availability of human capital within a firm,
and the specificity of the technology (see also Labriandis and
Kalogeressis, 2006; Jarvis et al., 2006; Galliano et al., 2001;
Galliano and Roux, 2008). This means that the need for improved
digital connectivity varies per sector, or even per firm. Differences
like these show that there is a need for target audience programs,
when it comes to improving the adoption rates in rural areas.
5.3. Digital inequalities research (31 papers)
The move towards a more nuanced understanding of the digital
divide has been strongly influenced by the agenda-setting article of
DiMaggio et al. (2001). They state that social sciences should study
the ‘social implications of the Internet’ in its full complex context,
instead of studying specific parts of the context. Van Dijk and
Hacker (2003) later showed that, after the point of saturation for
the provision of connections, there are increasing differences in
skills and usage, pointing out the growing complexity of the inequalities
and the digital divide. We will frame this field under the
term ‘digital inequalities research.’ The bulk of the research that has
followed is either non-spatial (see for example Helsper, 2012) or
urban-focused (see for example Gilbert, 2010). Non-spatial or urban
digital inequalities research assumes ubiquitous connectivity. In
rural areas, however, ubiquitous connectivity (see Sections 4.2e4.4)
does not exist. Conclusions based on most of the research on digital
inequalities therefore do not apply to rural areas.
Although non-spatial and urban contexts are partially incommensurate
with rural contexts, there is a strand of research that
applies concepts from digital inequalities research to rural areas.
The literature on the macro level focuses on national or other largescale
statistics, with the aim of providing an overview of the
characteristics of people in relation to the use of ICTs. The determining
factors that are frequently observed are age, education,
gender, and income (Van Dijk and Hacker, 2003; Mills and
Whitacre, 2003; Michailidis et al., 2011; Lengsfeld, 2011). This
literature, however, is inconclusive as to which of the explanatory
characteristics plays a dominant role in the use of ICTs.
In the micro-level literature, the research is aimed at finding out
how people's lives and social positions are affected by the growing
importance of ICTs, using social networks and social capital as
conceptual bases (see for example Boase, 2010; Stern and Adams,
2010; Stern et al., 2011). Most micro-level literature, however, focuses
on specific groups of mostly vulnerable people (see also
Warren, 2007), such as rural children (Valentine and Holloway,
2001), rural youth (Laegran, 2002; Dooris et al., 2008; Awan and
Gauntlett, 2012), rural women (Rubinoff, 2005), older people
(Park, 2008), rural patients (Miller and West, 2009), or people living
in remote areas, such as employees and teleworkers in rural areas
(Simpson et al., 2003; Laegran, 2008; Brownlee et al., 2010), as well
as farmers (Briggeman and Whitacre, 2010; Jeffcoat et al., 2012) and
entrepreneurs (Grimes, 2000, 2003; 2005). A majority of these
studies (11 of 13 papers) show that rapid digital developments
make these groups more vulnerable to digital and social exclusion.
An urban-led agenda that assumes ubiquitous connectivity, and
adjusts policy and services to this assumption, further increases the
vulnerability of vulnerable people in rural regions. In order to
prevent or at least limit the impact of this, the literature concludes
that the individual user should be empowered, for example by
enhancing his/her skills (Briggeman and Whitacre, 2010). This
empowerment, however, cannot take place without the improvement
of general social and economic conditions, which ought to
enable the use of digital technologies.
Generally speaking, we can conclude that low-educated, poorly
literate people with little experience in using ICTs are vulnerable to
exclusion from digital developments, which further increases their
offline exclusion and marginalization. The attitude of people towards
ICTs, and whether they aspire to use these for their existing
everyday activities, along with whether they consider them useful
for these practices, together determine whether people are willing
to learn how to use such technologies. Merely providing the technology
e the dominant rationale in connectivity research e is not
sufficient to promote digital inclusion. To achieve this, inclusion
research calls for user empowerment in order to make it possible
for people to deal with rapid digital change. On the other hand,
without material resources such as a physical connection and
money for subscriptions, user empowerment is useless (Michailidis
et al., 2011).
5.4. Digital inclusion policy (16 papers)
Policy studies on digital inclusion show two trends. The first
attempts to create an overview of policy initiatives and their efficacy,
using a macro-level and agenda-setting approach. The second
uses a micro-level approach, evaluating specific (local) projects and
methods designed to promote inclusion of specific vulnerable
groups.
On the macro-level (6 papers), papers share the axiom that
being able to use ICTs will allow people in rural areas to become
more included in community life, education, and knowledge-based
economic activities (Dabinett, 2000; Birch and Cumbers, 2010),
through which they can eventually escape the rural penalty. These
axioms are now also applied in research on transitional countries
(Akca et al., 2007). However, policy programs and initiatives to
promote the use of such ICTs are criticized for ignoring the rural
socioeconomic and geographical contexts (Birch and Cumbers,
2010; see also Awan and Gauntlett, 2012). This results in generic
initiatives with limited effects on the adoption and use of ICTs by
the most vulnerable groups in rural and remote areas (Strover et al.,
2004; Tookey et al., 2006). There is some literature on good practices
which states that initiatives need to acknowledge the importance
of community cultures and fit into community life in order to
achieve the greatest possible impact (Moon et al., 2012; Lin and Wu,
2013).
On the micro level (10 papers), studies on specific projects and
methods show how these projects enhance learning about ICTs,
and how to use them, both for people (Uotinen, 2003; Suhonen and
Sutinen, 2006; LaRose et al., 2011) and for firms in remote rural
areas (Sellitto and Burgess, 2005). The general view in this literature
is that, in the case of arrears, the government should take the
lead in organizing inclusion-promoting projects. To achieve the
greatest possible effect, Gripenberg et al. (2004) state that the
government should consider handing over the management of the
project to the people of the community, for whom or with whom
the project has been designed. This way, the community itself is
responsible for making the project activities fit into the community's
culture.
Within this subtheme there is a specific focus on indigenous
366 K. Salemink et al. / Journal of Rural Studies 54 (2017) 360e371
people, just as in the connectivity policy subtheme (see Section
4.5). The Australian literature concludes that, although indigenous
communities currently are the digitally most deprived group
(Bandias and Ram Vemuri, 2005), there is potential for an increase
in usage in these communities. To achieve this, Morrison (2000)
claims that community governance bodies should be given the
authority to determine policy and activities. They are regarded as
knowing best what or who can be a driver for people to adopt and
promote the usage of ICTs. Lindberg and Uden (2010)  , on the other
hand, observe the key role women play as drivers towards innovative
ICT application, in their case in a reindeer-herding Sami
village. They also stress that the role of gender in ICT adoption is
culturally and community specific.
The inclusion policy literature, especially the micro and project
level papers, shows the determining influence that the geographical,
social, economic, and cultural context has on the efficiency and
efficacy of policy initiatives. Activities to promote learning about
ICTs and their usage need to fit into the everyday activities of a
community and suit its culture. Problems in different regions and
communities do show similarities, but generic policy approaches
have proven to be ineffective. Moreover, many regions and communities
have yet to bridge the gaps they experience. There is more
chance of achieving this by including these communities in the
decision-making and implementation, or by introducing community
ownership of projects. In Europe there is now an opportunity
to bring this idea into practice, with the new EU Cohesion Policy
(2014e2020) focusing more on community-led local development
(European Commission, 2014).
6. General conclusions and prospects for digital rural
development
6.1. Market dependency and the urban-rural divide
This systematic literature review provides an overview of the
shifting focal points and topical issues in the debate on digital developments
and rural development. The debate is somewhat fragmented
over various disciplines and themes, yet we have extracted
prevailing ideas on how rural development is affected. Together,
the 157 selected papers recognize, either implicitly or explicitly,
that society as a whole is moving towards a digital information
society, in which access to and use of data infrastructure are
essential. Authors dealing with rural issues follow the work of key
scholars in this debate (Castells, 2000; DiMaggio et al., 2001;
Helsper, 2012). The prevailing idea is that, in order to have equal
opportunities for every person, household, and firm, everyone
should be connected to high speed Internet. Furthermore, people
have to know how to effectively use ICTs for their economic benefit
or their quality of life, i.e. to keep up with developments. Not
keeping up is considered as leading to “digital exclusion,” “lagging
rural development,” or “economic decline” (see Table 3).
Theoretical considerations as to how the digital society should
develop in order to create benefits for everyone are in great
contrast with rural reality. Developments so far indicate that telecommunication
companies will not provide every rural household
or business with a high-speed Internet connection comparable to
those in urban areas. Rural areas are served last, if they are served at
all (see for example the case of cable Internet; Nucciarelli et al.,
2010: 514). The speed and reliability of connections in rural areas
demonstrate this. Compared to urban areas, the profit opportunity
in rural areas is lower because of the high costs of covering greater
distances. Companies are only willing to deploy a network if
households and businesses pay a higher price to make up for these
higher deployments costs. Insights from the connectivity debate
(section 4) show that, under the current conditions, we can expect
that the urban-rural divide will persist or even grow, as new, faster
technologies come on-stream, perpetuating the rural penalty.
This literature review also serves as a warning to policy makers.
Since the early 1990s, several academics have pointed out the potential
of high-speed telecommunication networks for regional and
rural development (see sections 4.5 and 5.4). This theoretical potential
now has turned into a claim based on empirical grounds:
Digital connectivity either stimulates productivity and growth, or it
limits further decline. With this message there has always been a
warning from academia to governments and policy makers that the
high costs of deploying the infrastructure would deter telecommunication
companies from investing in rural networks. Considering
the current state of digital connectivity in rural areas, this
warning has come true.
This paper has shown that there is a growing consensus that
poor rural telecommunication infrastructure hinders rural development.
However, policies for promoting the availability of connections,
along with the adoption and use of ICTs, have been
responsive in character, and largely unsuccessful. Generic policies
appear to be inappropriate, or, as Belloc et al. state: “… different
policy combinations suit different policy objectives (…) different
initial conditions: there is no one-size-fits-all policy” (2012: 397).
To ‘customize’ policies, however, making use of local knowledge of
the various rural stakeholders seems fundamental.
A general conclusion from the literature on connectivity is that
governments have only been able to react to market and societal
developments, instead of anticipating them. By promoting the freemarket
rationale and using competition as the instrument for
improving digital connectivity, instead of defining new technologies
as utilities, governments have limited their influence on digital
development, allowing for market failure (Atkinson, 2011). This has
brought about programs to stimulate digital connectivity in rural
areas with technologies and minimum service levels that were
already outdated by the time they were deployed (see section 4.5).
The EU's struggle to deal with NGA technologies, while still promoting
basic broadband, is a striking example of this (see also
Nucciarelli et al., 2010; Ragoobar et al., 2011). It shows the need for
place-specific and community-specific policies, since needs and
demand are defined locally.
In times of ever growing global competition, the digital rural
penalty might result in a further loss of competitiveness of rural
regions, affecting the overall competitiveness of national economies.
The paradox in this digitalizing age is that the regions most in
need of improved digital connectivity, i.e. rural regions in decline,
are the regions which are the least connected and included. Next
Generation Access may not necessarily be a public service, but
considering how much public value it can create, it can be seen as a
public good that is required in order to provide other (public) services,
such as eHealth and eGovernment (see sections 4.5 and 5.4).
6.2. Towards a community-based research agenda
A general question that has come up in the analysis of the papers
is the extent to which the debate on digital inequalities is an
entirely new one. And, more fundamentally, is there a tangible
digital society from which people and places can be excluded? The
two main research directions that we discerned in this paper,
connectivity and inclusion, are not new. The ability to connect to
and be included in major developments, as a prerequisite for
growth, is omnipresent in regional development and social inclusion
literature (see sections 4 and 5). The digital context, however,
is relatively new. There is, nevertheless, much to be learned from
existing offline arrears and the lagging diffusion of technologies.
Future research should bring together theories from previous
research on ’analog’ connectivity, accessibility and inequality
K. Salemink et al. / Journal of Rural Studies 54 (2017) 360e371 367
issues, and research on ‘digital’ forms of these issues. For a
comprehensive understanding of digital rural development, the
largely offline-based economic history and everyday life ought to
be part of the research agenda. Digital developments are not
something ‘virtual’ which takes place online; these developments
are based in real life.
This paper has demonstrated that, up to now, research on digital
development in the rural consisted of two major strands of research
e connectivity and inclusion e each with its own focus. Research on
connectivity issues (section 4) is largely place-based and focuses on
supply side arguments, such as deployment costs, and economic
impact. Dominated by economic thinking, the urban focus of
markets is regarded as a contextual fact when discussing the position
of the rural. In this context, top-down regulatory measures
and subsidies are the most common instruments to deal with the
urban-rural divide (section 4.5). Research on inclusion issues
(section 5) is largely people-based and focuses on demand side and
bottom-up elements, such as diffusion, skills, affordability, cultural
differences and attitudes towards ICTs. The focus on the inclusion of
all people, regardless of their background, can help showing the
public value of ICTs and improved digital connectivity (sections 5.3
and 5.4). Moreover, inclusion research can provide the market with
insights on latent demand of excluded and disconnected groups in
the rural; insights which can be used to potentially bridge the gap
between demand and supply.
The potential role of inclusion research in stimulating, and
eventually bundling, (latent) demand in the rural is the reason why
we call for a more integrated research agenda for digital rural
development, in which connectivity and inclusion are no longer
separate strands of research. Inclusion research should focus on
Table 3
Summarized overview of digital connectivity in rural development.
Connectivity Effects on rural development
Telecommunications
Markets
n ¼ 13
Rural areas do not provide enough market potential for investments; profit potential is larger in urban areas
Lack of investment in telecommunication technologies
High investments in urban areas, low investments in rural areas: urban-rural digital divide
Technology
n ¼ 13
Lack of availability and choice of technologies
Limited opportunity for activities that require telecommunication technologies
Wireless technologies are also limited by market deficiencies; it is not yet an alternative in rural areas
Regional Development
n ¼ 25
Mixed conclusions on GDP growth, entrepreneurial activity, migration to rural areas
Due to continuous developments in urban areas, rural areas are not catching up, so no cohesion is taking place
Traditional industries benefit especially from increased digital connectivity; it is less likely that rural regions will attract innovative or creative
industries
Axiom that regions benefit from improved digital connectivity
Improved digital connectivity opens up the rural for competition from outside
Policy and Regulation
n ¼ 32
Policies have a responsive character
Technological development moves faster than policy development
Sector-scattered interest
Free-market rationale has hindered developments in rural areas, especially in Europe; governments have not been allowed to interfere
Inclusion
Diffusion Theory
n ¼ 27
Diffusion of ICTs through space and time, with a demand-side focus
Traditional view: Remoteness of rural areas places rural communities at the end of the diffusion stage; late adopters and laggards
Adoption and use of ICTs in rural areas is also constrained by lagging supply
Willingness to adopt new ICTs in firms differs per sector
Digital inequalities
n ¼ 31
Knowledge, skills, attitudes, and aspiration are key factors in why and to what extent people use ICTs
Digital empowerment depends on wider offline-based socioeconomic contexts
Low educational levels and skill levels in rural areas are considered a problem
Digital inclusion policy
n ¼ 16
Generic policies are incapable of reducing inequalities
Impact of policies and projects depends on the extent to which local community culture and practices are taken into account
Policies are more likely to succeed if communities are involved in the decision-making; community ownership of projects is preferable
Fig. 1. Combining connectivity and inclusion research to create a community-based approach.
368 K. Salemink et al. / Journal of Rural Studies 54 (2017) 360e371
community processes which can stimulate and bundle local demand,
which is often still fragmented over various stakeholders
and consumers. Connectivity research, on the other hand, should
focus on how markets can serve these increased demand levels in
rural areas. Both focal points are in need of a reflection on the role
of national and local governments. The question then is: To what
extent are rural communities, united in civic initiatives or community
action groups, and telecommunications companies able to
regulate this process together, and where do they need government
support? The purpose of the design is that connectivity and inclusion
research are combined and applied in specific community
contexts. Our idea for this agenda is presented in Fig. 1.
Generic policies have not solved the urban-rural digital divide.
The rural is in need of ‘customized’ policies, but telecommunications
companies cannot serve every individual need. The community
level seems an appropriate intermediate level for negotiation
between the generic (national) level and the individual level. We
argue that connectivity research and inclusion research can be
brought together in a community-based approach, which facilitates
market interface at the community level. Various local needs can be
brought together (see Fig. 1).
The community level allows for local cultural differences to be
recognized in demand bundling processes. Once the local demand
is bundled, this can trigger the market to serve the rural community
on the community's terms. If the market is not triggered, the demand
bundling process can at least make clear what the gap is
between demand and supply. In this way, the community-based
approach results in a rural business case, which is either marketready
or in need of a specific level of government support. Based
on insights from the debate so far, we can expect that socially
excluded communities, and communities which lack financial and
social capital, will be most in need of government support in this
community-based approach. Digital connectivity and digital inclusion
are becoming increasingly important in the digital age, but
'offline' social and economic developments will continue to resonate
in the field of rural development.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank the reviewers and the guest
editor for their valuable comments on earlier versions of this paper.
This research would not have been possible without the financial
support of the EU Interreg IVB North Sea Region Programme project
‘ITRACT’.
References
Akca, H., Sayili, M., Esengun, K., 2007. Challenge of rural people to reduce digital
divide in the globalized world: theory and practice. Gov. Inf. Q. 24 (2), 404e413.
Atkinson, R.D., 2011. Economic doctrines and network policy. Telecommun. Policy
35 (5), 413e425.
Awan, F., Gauntlett, D., 2012. Remote living: exploring online (and offline) experiences
of young people living in rural areas. Eur. J. Cult. Stud. 16 (1), 3e23.
Bandias, S., Ram Vemuri, S., 2005. Telecommunications infrastructure facilitating
sustainable development of rural and remote communities in Northern
Australia. Telecommun. Policy 29 (2e3), 237e249.
Belloc, F., Nicita, A., Alessandra Rossi, M., 2012. Whither policy design for broadband
penetration? Evidence from 30 OECD countries. Telecommun. Policy 36 (5),
382e398.
Berg, S.V., Jiang, L., Lin, C., 2011. Incentives for cost shifting and misreporting: US
rural universal service subsidies, 1991e2002. Inf. Econ. Policy 23 (3e4),
287e295.
Birch, K., Cumbers, A., 2010. Knowledge, space, and economic governance: the
implications of knowledge-based commodity chains for less-favoured regions.
Environ. Plan. A 42 (11), 2581e2601.
Boase, J., 2010. The consequences of personal networks for internet use in rural
areas. Am. Behav. Sci. 53 (9), 1257e1267.
Bosworth, G., 2010. Commercial counterurbanisation: an emerging force in rural
economic development. Environ. Plan. A 42 (4), 966e981.
Briggeman, B.C., Whitacre, B.E., 2010. Farming and the internet: reasons for nonuse.
Agric. Resour. Econ. Rev. 39 (3), 571e584.
Brownlee, K., Graham, J.R., Doucette, E., Hotson, N., Halverson, G., 2010. Have
communication technologies influenced rural social work practice? Br. J. Soc.
Work 40 (2), 622e637.
Camagni, R., Capello, R., 2005. ICTs and territorial competitiveness in the era of the
internet. Ann. Regional Sci. 39 (3), 421e438.
Cambini, C., Jiang, Y., 2009. Broadband investment and regulation: a literature review.
Telecommun. Policy 33 (10e11), 559e574.
Capello, R., Caragliu, A., Nijkamp, P., 2011. Territorial capital and regional growth:
Increasing returns in knowledge use. Tijdschr. Econ. Soc. Geogr. 102 (4),
385e405.
Capello, R., Nijkamp, P., 1996. Telecommunications technologies and regional
development: Theoretical considerations and empirical evidence. Ann. Regional
Sci. 30 (1), 7e30.
Castells, M., 2000. Materials for an exploratory theory of the network society. Br. J.
Sociol. 51 (1), 5e24.
Cornford, J., Gillespie, A., 1993. Cable systems, telephony and local economic
development in the UK. Telecommun. Policy 17 (8), 589e602.
Cronin, F.J., McGovern, P.M., Miller, M.R., Parker, E.B., 1995. The rural economic
development implications of telecommunications: evidence from Pennsylvania.
Telecommun. Policy 19 (7), 545e559.
Cumming, D., Johan, S., 2010. The differential impact of the internet on spurring
regional Entrepreneurship. Entrepreneursh. Theory Pract. 34 (5), 857e883.
Dabinett, G., 2000. Regenerating communities in the UK: getting plugged into the
information society? Community Dev. J. 35 (2), 157e166.
Dooris, J., Sotireli, T., Van Hoof, S., 2008. Distant friends online? Rural and urban
adolescents' communication on the internet. Tijdschr. Econ. Soc. Geogr. 99 (3),
293e302.
DiMaggio, P., Hargittai, E., Russell Neuman, W., Robinson, J.P., 2001. Social implications
of the internet. Annu. Rev. Sociol. 27 (1), 307e336.
Egan, B.L., 1992. Bringing advanced technology to rural America. Telecommun.
Policy 16 (1), 27e45.
Ellershaw, J., Riding, J., Lee, A., Tran, A.V., Guan, L.J., Tucker, R., Smith, T., Stumpf, E.,
2009. Deployment costs of rural broadband technologies. Telecommun. J. Aust.
59 (2), 29.1e29.16.
European Commission, 2013. Communication from the Commission. EU Guidelines
for the Application of State Aid Rules in Relation to the Rapid Deployment of
Broadband Networks, 26-1-2013, Brussels.
European Commission, 2014. Communication from the Commission. Guidance on
Community-led Local Development in European Structural and Investment
Funds. June 2014, Brussels.
Falch, M., Henten, A., 2010. Public private partnerships as a tool for stimulating
investments in broadband. Telecommun. Policy 34 (9), 496e504.
Ford, G.S., Koutsky, T.M., 2005. Broadband and economic development: a municipal
case study from Florida. Rev. Urban & Regional Dev. Stud. 17 (3), 216e229.
Forman, C., Goldfarb, A., Greenstein, S., 2012. The internet and local wages: a puzzle.
Am. Econ. Rev. 102 (1), 556e575.
Forman, C., Goldfarb, A., Greenstein, S., 2005a. Geographic location and the diffusion
of internet technology. Electron. Commer. Res. Appl. 4 (1), 1e13.
Forman, C., Goldfarb, A., Greenstein, S., 2005b. How did location affect adoption of
the commercial Internet? Global village vs. urban leadership. J. Urban Econ. 58
(3), 389e420.
Gabe, T.M., Abel, J.R., 2002. Deployment of advanced telecommunications infrastructure
in rural America: measuring the digital divide. Am. J. Agric. Econ. 84
(5), 1246e1252.
Gallardo, R., Scammahorn, R., 2011. Determinants of innovative versus noninnovative
entrepreneurs in three southern states. Rev. Regional Stud. 41 (2),
103e117.
Galliano, D., Roux, P., 2008. Organisational motives and spatial effects in internet
adoption and intensity of use: evidence from French industrial firms. Ann.
Regional Sci. 42 (2), 425e448.
Galliano, D., Roux, P., Filippi, M., 2001. Organisational and spatial determinants of
ICT adoption: the case of French industrial firms. Environ. Plan. A 33 (9),
1643e1663.
Galloway, L., Mochrie, R., 2005. The use of ICT in rural firms: a policy-oriented
literature review. Info 7 (3), 33e46.
Gilbert, M., 2010. Theorizing digital and urban Inequalities: critical geographies of
‘race’, gender and technological capital. Inf. Commun. Soc. 13 (7), 1000e1018.
Glass, V., Stefanova, S.K., 2012. Economies of scale for broadband in rural United
States. J. Regul. Econ. 41 (1), 100e119.
Glass, V., Stefanova, S.K., 2010. An empirical study of broadband diffusion in rural
America. J. Regul. Econ. 38 (1), 70e85.
Goddard, J.B., Gillespie, A.E., 1986. Advanced telecommunications and regional
economic development. Geogr. J. 152 (3), 383e397.
Goggins, S.P., Mascaro, C., 2013. Context matters: the experience of physical,
informational, and cultural distance in a rural it firm. Inf. Soc. 29 (2), 113e127.
Gomez-Barroso, J.L., Feij  oo, C., 2012. Volition versus feasibility: state aid when aid is
looked upon favourably: the broadband example. Eur. J. Law Econ. 34 (2),
347e364.
Greenstein, S., McDevitt, R.C., 2011. The broadband bonus: estimating broadband
Internet's economic value. Telecommun. Policy 35 (7), 617e632.
Gripenberg, P., Skogseid, I., Botto, F., Silli, A., Tuunainen, V.K., 2004. Entering the
european information society: four rural development projects. Inf. Soc. 20 (1),
3e14.
Grimes, S., 2005. How well are Europe's rural businesses connected to the digital
K. Salemink et al. / Journal of Rural Studies 54 (2017) 360e371 369
economy? Eur. Plan. Stud. 13 (7), 1063e1081.
Grimes, S., 2003. The digital economy challenge facing peripheral rural areas. Prog.
Hum. Geogr. 27 (2), 174e193.
Grimes, S., 2000. Rural areas in the information society: diminishing distance or
increasing learning capacity? J. Rural Stud. 16 (1), 13e21.
Grubesic, T.H., 2010. Efficiency in broadband service provision: a spatial analysis.
Telecommun. Policy 34 (3), 117e131.
Grubesic, T.H., 2008. The spatial distribution of broadband providers in the United
States: 1999e2004. Telecommun. Policy 32 (3e4), 212e233.
Grubesic, T.H., 2006. A spatial taxonomy of broadband regions in the United States.
Inf. Econ. Policy 18 (4), 423e448.
Grubesic, T.H., 2003. Inequities in the broadband revolution. Ann. Regional Sci. 37
(2), 263e289.
Grubesic, T.H., Murray, A.T., 2004. Waiting for broadband: local competition and the
spatial distribution of advanced telecommunications services in the United
States. Growth Change 35 (2), 139e165.
Gulati, G.J., Yates, D.J., 2012. Different paths to universal access: the impact of policy
and regulation on broadband diffusion in the developed and developing worlds.
Telecommun. Policy 36 (9), 749e761.
Hage, E., Roo, J., Van Offenbeek, M., Boonstra, A., 2013. Implementation factors and
their effect on e-Health service adoption in rural communities: a systematic
literature review. BMC Health Serv. Res. 13 (19), 1e16.
Helsper, E.J., 2012. A corresponding Fields model for the links between social and
digital exclusion. Commun. Theory 22 (4), 403e426.
Hilbert, M., 2011. The end justifies the definition: the manifold outlooks on the
digital divide and their practical usefulness for policy-making. Telecommun.
Policy 35 (8), 715e736.
Hite, J., 1997. The Thunen model and the new economic geography as a paradigm
for rural development policy. Rev. Agric. Econ. 19 (2), 230e240.
Hollifield, C.A., Donnermeyer, J.F., 2003. Creating demand: influencing information
technology diffusion in rural communities. Gov. Inf. Q. 20 (2), 135e150.
Hollifield, A.C., Donnermeyer, J.F., Wolford, G.H., Agunga, R., 2000. The effects of
rural telecommunications self-development projects on local adoption of new
technologies. Telecommun. Policy 24 (8e9), 761e779.
Holt, L., Galligan, M., 2013. Mapping the field: retrospective of the federal universal
service programs. Telecommun. Policy 37 (9), 773e793.
Howick, S., Whalley, J., 2008. Understanding the drivers of broadband adoption: the
case of rural and remote Scotland. J. Operational Res. Soc. 59 (10), 1299e1311.
Jarvis, D., Dunham, P., Ilbery, B., 2006. Local rural labour markets: enterprising or
constraining? Local Econ. 21 (2), 151e165.
Jeffcoat, C., Davis, A.F., Hu, W., 2012. Willingness to pay for broadband access by
Kentucky farmers. J. Agric. Appl. Econ. 44 (3), 323e334.
Kandilov, I.T., Renkow, M., 2010. Infrastructure investment and rural economic
development: an evaluation of USDA's broadband loan program. Growth
Change 41 (2), 165e191.
Khatiwada, L.K., Pigg, K.E., 2010. Internet service provision in the U.S. Counties: Is
spatial pattern a function of demand? Am. Behav. Sci. 53 (9), 1326e1343.
Kilpelainen, A., Sepp € €
anen, M., 2014. Information technology and everyday life in
ageing rural villages. J. Rural Stud. 33, 1e8.
Kirschner, A.R., 2005. Computer services and the development of rural areas: trends
in the Pacific Northwest in the 1990s. Soc. Sci. J. 42 (4), 541e554.
Kolko, J., 2012. Broadband and local growth. J. Urban Econ. 71 (1), 100e113.
Labrianidis, L., Kalogeressis, T., 2006. The digital divide in Europe's rural enterprises.
Eur. Plan. Stud. 14 (1), 23e39.
Laegran, A.S., 2008. Domesticating home anchored work: negotiating flexibility
when bringing ICT based work home in rural communities. Geoforum 39 (6),
1991e1999.
Laegran, A.S., 2002. The petrol station and the internet cafe: rural technospaces for
youth. J. Rural Stud. 18 (2), 157e168.
LaRose, R., Gregg, J.L., Strover, S., Straubhaar, J., Carpenter, S., 2007. Closing the rural
broadband gap: promoting adoption of the internet in rural America. Telecommun.
Policy 31 (6e7), 359e373.
LaRose, R., Strover, S., Gregg, J.L., Straubhaar, J., 2011. The impact of rural broadband
development: lessons from a natural field experiment. Gov. Inf. Q. 28 (1),
91e100.
Lengsfeld, J.H.B., 2011. An Econometric analysis of the sociodemographic topology
of the digital divide in Europe. Inf. Soc. 27 (3), 141e157.
Lentz, R.G., Oden, M.D., 2001. Digital divide or digital opportunity in the Mississippi
Delta region of the US. Telecommun. Policy 25 (5), 291e313.
Lera-Lopez, F., Bill  on-Curr  as, M., 2005. Shortfalls and inequalities in the develop-
ment of E-Economy in the E.U.-15. Commun. Strategies 60 (4), 181e200.
Lichter, D.T., Brown, D.L., 2011. Rural America in an urban society: changing spatial
and social boundaries. Annu. Rev. Sociol. 37, 565e592.
Lin, M., Wu, F., 2013. Identifying the determinants of broadband adoption by
diffusion stage in OECD countries. Telecommun. Policy 37 (4e5), 241e251.
Lindberg, M., Úden, M., 2010. Women, reindeer herding and the Internet: an
innovative process in northern Sweden. Innovation Eur. J. Soc. Sci. Res. 23 (2),
169e177.
Livingstone, S., Helsper, E., 2007. Gradations in digital inclusion: children, young
people and the digital divide. New Media Soc. 9 (4), 671e696.
Mack, E.A., Grubesic, T.H., 2009. Forecasting broadband provision. Inf. Econ. Policy
21 (4), 297e311.
Madden, G., Savage, S.J., Coble-Neal, G., Bloxham, P., 2000. Advanced communications
policy and adoption in rural Western Australia. Telecommun. Policy 24 (4),
291e304.
Mahasuweerachai, P., Whitacre, B.E., Shideler, D.W., 2010. Does broadband access
impact migration in America? Examining differences between rural and urban
areas. Rev. Regional Stud. 40 (1), 5e26.
Malecki, E.J., 2010. Everywhere? The geography of knowledge. J. Regional Sci. 50 (1),
493e513.
Malecki, E.J., 2004. Fibre tracks: explaining investment in fibre optic backbones.
Entrepreneursh. Regional Dev. 16 (1), 21e36.
Malecki, E.J., 2003. Digital development in rural areas: potentials and pitfalls.
J. Rural Stud. 19 (2), 201e214.
Malecki, E.J., Boush, C.R., 2003. Telecommunications infrastructure in the Southeastern
United States: urban and rural variation. Growth Change 34 (1),
109e129.
Marien, I., Prodnik, J., 2014. Digital inclusion and user (dis)empowerment: a critical €
perspective. Info 16 (6), 35e47.
Markantoni, M., Strijker, D., Koster, S., 2014. Motives for starting up a side activity in
rural areas in the Netherlands. Local Econ. 29 (6e7), 723e739.
Martínez, D., Rodríguez, J., 2009. New technologies and regional growth: the case of
Andalucía. Ann. Regional Sci. 43 (4), 963e987.
Michailidis, A., Partalidou, M., Nastis, S.A., Papadaki-Klavdianou, A., Charatsari, C.,
2011. Who goes online? Evidence of internet use patterns from rural Greece.
Telecommun. Policy 35 (4), 333e343.
Miller, E.A., West, D.M., 2009. Where's the revolution? digital technology and health
care in the internet age. J. Health Polit. Policy Law 34 (2), 261e284.
Mills, B.F., Whitacre, B., 2003. Understanding the non-metropolitan-metropolitan
digital divide. Growth Change 34 (2), 219e243.
Moon, J., Hossain, M.D., Kang, H.G., Shin, J., 2012. An analysis of agricultural informatization
in Korea: the government's role in bridging the digital gap. Inf. Dev.
28 (2), 102e116.
Morrison, P., 2000. A pilot implementation of internet access for remote aboriginal
communities in the ‘Top end’ of Australia. Urban Stud. 37 (10), 1781e1792.
Muhammad, S., Ottens, H.F.L., Ettema, D., De Jong, T., 2007. Telecommuting and
residential locational preferences: a case study of the Netherlands. J. Hous. Built
Environ. 22 (4), 339e358.
Nucciarelli, A., Sadowski, B.M., Achard, P.O., 2010. Emerging models of publiceprivate
interplay for European broadband access: evidence from the
Netherlands and Italy. Telecommun. Policy 34 (9), 513e527.
Ofcom, 2014. UK Fixed-Line Performance: The Performance of Fixed-line Broadband
Delivered to UK Residential Consumers. November 2014, online publication.
O‘Hara, K., Stevens, D., 2006. Inequality.com. Oneworld Oxford, Oxford.
Oyana, T.J., 2011. Exploring geographic disparities in broadband access and use in
rural southern Illinois: who's being left behind? Gov. Inf. Q. 28 (2), 252e261.
Park, Y., 2008. The missing gap between internet use and benefits: seniors' limited
internet experiences and social marginalization. Dev. Soc. 37 (1), 97e115.
Peronard, J., Just, F., 2011. User motivation for broadband: a rural Danish study.
Telecommun. Policy 35 (8), 691e701.
Prieger, J.E., 2013. The broadband digital divide and the economic benefits of mobile
broadband for rural areas. Telecommun. Policy 37 (6e7), 483e502.
Ragoobar, T., Whalley, J., Harle, D., 2011. Public and private intervention for nextgeneration
access deployment: possibilities for three European countries. Telecommun.
Policy 35 (9e10), 827e841.
Ramírez, R., 2007. Appreciating the contribution of broadband ICT with rural and
remote communities: stepping stones toward an alternative paradigm. Inf. Soc.
23 (2), 85e94.
Ramírez, R., 2003. Bridging disciplines: the natural resource management kaleidoscope
for understanding ICTs. J. Dev. Commun. 14 (1), 51e64.
Ramırez, R., 2001. A model for rural and remote information and communication
technologies: a Canadian exploration. Telecommun. Policy 25 (5), 315e330.
Rennie, E., Crouch, A., Wright, A., Thomas, J., 2013. At home on the outstation:
barriers to home internet in remote indigenous communities. Telecommun.
Policy 37 (6e7), 583e593.
Roberts, E., Townsend, L., 2015. The contribution of the creative economy to the
resilience of rural communities: Exploring cultural and digital capital. Sociol.
Rural. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/soru.12075. Advance online publication.
Rogers, E.M., 2003. Diffusion of Innovations. Free Press, New York.
Rubinoff, D.D., 2005. Life histories in cyberspace: life writing as a development tool
for rural women. Geoforum 36 (1), 59e75.
Sadowski, B.M., Nucciarelli, A., De Rooij, M., 2009. Providing incentives for private
investment in municipal broadband networks: evidence from the Netherlands.
Telecommun. Policy 33 (10e11), 582e595.
Sellitto, C., Burgess, S., 2005. A government-funded internet portal as a promoter of
regional cluster relationships: a case study from the Australian wine industry.
Environ. Plan. C 23 (6), 851e866.
Simpson, L., Daws, L., Pini, B., Wood, L., 2003. Rural telework: case studies from the
Australian outback. New Technol. Work Employ. 18 (2), 115e126.
Simpson, L., Daws, L., Pini, B., 2004. Public internet access revisited. Telecommun.
Policy 28 (3e4), 323e337.
Skerratt, S., 2010. Hot spots and not spots: addressing infrastructure and service
provision through combined approaches in rural Scotland. Sustainability 2 (6),
1719e1741.
Skerratt, S., Farrington, J., Heesen, F., 2012. Next generation broadband in rural
Scotland: Mobilizing, meeting and anticipating demand. In: Rural Scotland in
Focus Report 2012. SRUC Rural Policy Centre Publications, pp. 70e85 web
version, accessed on 08-05-2013.
Steele, R., Lo, A., 2013. Telehealth and ubiquitous computing for bandwidthconstrained
rural and remote areas. Personal. Ubiquitous Comput. 17 (3),
370 K. Salemink et al. / Journal of Rural Studies 54 (2017) 360e371
533e543.
Stern, M.J., Adams, A.E., 2010. Do rural residents really use the internet to build
social capital? an empirical investigation. Am. Behav. Sci. 53 (9), 1389e1422.
Stern, M.J., Adams, A.E., Boase, J., 2011. Rural community participation, social networks,
and broadband use: examples from localized and national survey data.
Agric. Resour. Econ. Rev. 40 (2), 158e171.
Stockdale, A., MacLeod, M., 2013. Pre-retirement age migration to remote rural
areas. J. Rural Stud. 32, 80e92.
Strover, S., 2003. The prospects for broadband deployment in rural America. Gov.
Inf. Q. 20 (2), 95e106.
Strover, S., 2001. Rural internet connectivity. Telecommun. Policy 25 (5), 331e347.
Strover, S., Chapman, G., Waters, J., 2004. Beyond community networking and CTCs:
access, development, and public policy. Telecommun. Policy 28 (7e8),
