Towards understanding digital divide in rural partnerships and
development: A framework and evidence from rural Australia
Michael O. Erdiaw-Kwasie*
, Khorshed Alam
School of Commerce, Faculty of Business, Education, Law & Arts, Australian Centre for Sustainable Business and Development, University of Southern
Queensland, Toowoomba, Queensland, Australia
article info
Article history:
Received 9 January 2015
Received in revised form
2 December 2015
Accepted 7 December 2015
Available online 29 December 2015
JEL Classification:
L86
M14
H7
Keywords:
Digital divide
Rural partnership
Rural development
Local communities
Mining industry
abstract
Despite increasing recognition that the world's social and environmental problems cannot be addressed
solely by business, government or society in isolation, the role of partnerships in rural development has
only recently started to attract the interest of rural studies scholars. The study adds to the growing
stream of research by investigating how the information age's emerging social challenge e the digital
divide e influences rural partnerships and development. Burgeoning literature evidences that the digital
divide encompasses not one but many discontinuities. This paper reconceptualises the digital divide
concept and explores exactly how its shocks and tensions impact rural partnerships and development.
Results of this research indicate that the digital divide is a threat to the performance of rural partnerships,
which consequently renders rural development outcomes unsustainable, lopsided and nonparticipatory.
This paper recommends the need for a more responsive and localised approach to rural
development partnerships that can enable disadvantaged groups to participate in today's digitally
connected economy and society.
© 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
The impact of information and communications technology
(ICT) on rural development is a much-contested issue. In most
developed countries, many communities are able to reap benefits
from using these valuable resources. However, less technologically
advanced communities are still unable to take full advantage of the
information and technology resources that could very well help to
improve their socio-economic status (Alam and Imran, 2015). As
the concept of endogenous or grassroots development continues to
attract increasing interest from academics and policymakers
(Fałkowski, 2013; Moseley, 2003; Ray, 2000), the issue of ruralpartnerships
has emerged as a common theme (Derkzen et al.,
2008; Furmankiewicz et al., 2010). In this research, a rural partnership
is understood to be the act of bringing diverse public and
private resources together into innovative collaborations to
strengthen communities and improve life in rural settings (see
Furmankiewicz et al., 2014).
Traditionally, as corporateecommunity partnerships are
frequently expected to provide benefits and opportunities, businesses
have therefore become more willing to recognise their role
as development actors (Kemp, 2010). These roles are frequently
executed via their partnership mechanisms, reflected in their
engagement, communication, negotiation, conflict resolution and
development programming strategies. Queensland, as a state in
Australia with huge coal seam gas (CSG) deposits, has on occasions
seen regions and communities experience a significant boom in
their local economies as a result of interactions between operating
firms and host communities. The Surat Resource Region in
Queensland, for example, has a long history in corporateecommunity
partnership initiatives. This has involved local
community groups e including property holders' groups, social
clubs and workers’ unions e interacting with operating firms to
address community needs, including irrigational projects with
farmers, rehabilitation of roads and airports, educational scholarships,
skills apprenticeship opportunities, affordable housing projects,
environmental projects and sponsorship of community social
events (CSIRO, 2012). Thus, there is little doubt that
* Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: Michael.Erdiaw-Kwasie@usq.edu.au, michaelodei2012@
yahoo.com (M.O. Erdiaw-Kwasie), khorshed.alam@usq.edu.au (K. Alam).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Journal of Rural Studies
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jrurstud
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jrurstud.2015.12.002
0743-0167/© 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Journal of Rural Studies 43 (2016) 214e224
corporateecommunity partnerships as a rural development
mechanism, is promising.
However, more recently, despite the extensive adoption of
partnerships and claims of their benefits to businesses and rural
societies, the reality is that the ability of rural partnerships to foster
development remains a fragile field (Erdiaw-Kwasie et al., 2014a).
Data presented in this paper was gathered as part of a broader,
three-year study that aims to develop and test a model describing
relational issues confronting partnerships between resource communities
and energy firms, and the implications of such issues for
corporate social responsibility (CSR) practices. The broader study
employed a multi-method and multi-phased research design. This
incorporates a content analysis of sustainability reports of five
leading mining companies in the Surat Resource Region in
Australia, and in-community case studies comprising surveys, interviews
and focus group discussions (FGDs), which were undertaken
in four resource towns in the study region. P
human actors e local or global e but is a multi-authored and
negotiated process that seeks to engage, define and position a vast
array of natural, material and social entities. It is therefore not
surprising that rural studies literature emphasises rural partnerships
as a vital engine for meaningful grassroots development
(Clark et al., 2007; Derkzen et al., 2008; Furmankiewicz et al., 2010).
In traditional rural contexts, rural development partnerships
appear to be appropriate for introducing new forms of integration
between existing actors and the efficient use of local resources
(Keegan and Nguyen, 2011). In the case of a more dynamic rural
context, rural partnerships usually tend to improve performance in
the institutional context. In attempting to understand the true attributes
of what a partnership looks like, Ray (2005) identified two
basic characteristics. The first states that rural partnership development
is oriented around maximising the retention of benefits
within the local territory by valorising and exploiting local resources.
Second, the development model emphasises local participation
in the design and implementation of action. A major strand
of research in rural studies has sought to understand common
experience and draw lessons on the successes and failures of
endogenous partnership approaches via international comparative
studies (see Dax, 2014; Fałkowski, 2013; Marquardt et al., 2012).
The first case is Moseley's (2003) PRIDE research project
(1999e2001), which provided comparative analysis of the experience
of partnerships across Western Europe, drawing mainly on the
experiences of the EU's LEADER Programme. In the same study, the
author identified three critical conditions which need to prevail for
a grassroots partnership to be successful: (i) the competence and
commitment of partnership staff, (ii) the successful mobilisation of
local knowledge about the needs and resources of the area, and (iii)
decision making being exerted at the local level (Moseley, 2003, pp.
164e165). Elsewhere, Kemp (2010) drew on his ethnographic
research and gave equal attention to rural community relations
within the context of the mining industry. His study unveiled that,
for community relations to gain strength and be meaningful, the
firm should de-link rural community relations from public
relations.
Considering that the practice of rural partnerships is a recent
experience in most European and Asia Pacific countries, several
problems remain to be solved if an appropriate contribution is to be
made by local partnerships to sustainable rural development
(Geddes, 2006; Macken-Walsh, 2010; Peck and Tickell, 1994). Past
studies highlight that despite endogenous partnerships providing
the interface for local initiatives, development actors and partners
do not attempt to reflect or mirror the local cultural context,
leading to an ethnocentric approach to partnerships and engagement
(see Fałkowski, 2013; Marquardt et al., 2012). This limits the
ability of local communities to build a meaningful partnership
interface. Despite these important works, the overall corpus of
grounded, ethnographic studies which focus on partnership challenges
of the digital divide in a rural context, remains small.
3. Overview of the digital divide
3.1. Defining and reconceptualising the digital divide
After a series of US Government reports adopted the term
‘digital divide’ e referring to the socio-economic gap between
communities that had access to computers and the Internet and
those who did not e the term quickly became one of the political
and academic ‘hotetopics’ of the 1990s. These debates are rooted in
a deeper history of the term, which has gained unprecedented
popularity as occurring between cadres of technological ‘haves’ and
‘have-nots’ or ‘information rich’ and ‘information poor’ (Howland,
1998). As general levels of access to computers and the Internet
have steadily risen, some academics, technologists and politicians
are talking of ‘the death’ of the digital divide and ‘declaring the war
won’ (see Strover, 2003; Sutherland, 2004).
Arguably, after two decades of such digital battle, perception
about the divide is undergoing huge reassessment. Recent research
challenges the current popular perception of the digital divide,
which equates inclusion in the information society with access to
computers and the Internet. The dichotomous approach (haves vs.
have-nots) has been challenged as being narrowly focused (Ewing,
2013), and hence expressions such as ‘redefining the digital divide’
and ‘beyond access’ have emerged (Underwood, 2007; Van Dijk and
Hacker, 2003). Servon (2002), for example, asserted that the
struggle to create such a change in digital divide thinking is
worthwhile, as earlier conceptualisation of the concept stands a
high risk of universal access without a social change. Thus, the
concept of the digital divide was modified as: (i) not only a technological,
but a social problem, that is, a phenomenon reflecting
broader social, economic, cultural and learning inequalities, and (ii)
concerning not only physical access but the required skills for using
computers/the Internet and what users do with them as well (Alam
and Imran, 2015; Borisov and Serban, 2013; Van Dijk, 2005). For
instance, Underwood (2007) shared that the initial digital divide
definition has been extended from the simple access model of
physical resources such as computers and broadband connectivity,
to levels of literacy and skills that allow individuals to fully engage
in the digital world. Similarly, during the second decade of the 21st
century, the OECD redefined digital divide as the gap between individuals,
households, businesses and geographic areas at different
socio-economic levels with regard to both their opportunities to
access ICTs and the inequity of the use of the Internet for a wide
variety of activities (OECD, 2013).
According to Cisler (2000), connectivity falls along a continuum
rather than into a bipolar split, and thus the divide concept e which
implies a bipolar division between the haves and the have-nots, the
connected and the disconnected e is problematic. Warschauer
(2003) further confirmed that the notion that the divide-induced
development gap can be filled by the provision of equipment
draws attention away from more complex long-term processes that
bolster social development and inclusion. Information and computer
technologies (ICTs) can play a critical role in social development
if, as Jarboe (2001, p.31) advised, we ‘focus on the
transformation, not the technology’. Servon (2002) indicated that
IT on its own does not function as a ladder out of poverty or social
deprivation, but intertwined with other critical factors, it can assist
in making rural policy efforts more complete and equitable.
3.2. The digital divide in Australia: the rural realities
Over the past decade, the rapid expansion of the Internet has
been transforming the Australian economy. It is likely to play an
even greater role in the daily lives of people and businesses as the
country positions itself to become a leading digital economy. After
the Networking the Nation (NTN) digital divide policy by the Coalition
Government in 1997, the Labor Government announced the
National Broadband Network (NBN) in 2009, which was aimed at
offering Internet speeds over 40 times greater than the current
average (Hoy, 2007). Today, in spite of the change in government,
the NBN is still being rolled out through public-private partnerships,
with changes in implementation plans already evidenced.
However, recent studies (see Ewing, 2013) indicate that even
though there is an increase in computer usage and Internet access
across metropolitan and rural areas in Australia, the digital divide
within these areas is still not decreasing. Bowles’ (2012) study
confirmed that, despite conscious efforts by the Australian Government
in pursuing various policies to bridge the digital divide
216 M.O. Erdiaw-Kwasie, K. Alam / Journal of Rural Studies 43 (2016) 214e224
since the mid-1990s, it is feared that the digital divide is in danger
of widening in Australia.
The rural dimensions to the digital divide are much evidenced in
the Australian context. Many Australian studies on Internet usage
and digital divide have claimed that the divide is present across
urban and rural areas. However, a more recent dataset confirms
that the rural areas in Australia are in a disadvantaged position in
terms of various socioeconomic indicators compared to their urban
counterparts (Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS, 2013a). In 2013,
the Internet diffusion rate in Australia was recorded to have crept
up but the distribution of access was far from equitable, particularly
between residents in metropolitan cities and rural communities in
regional areas. Exclusion is more concentrated in areas of socioeconomic
disadvantage such as urban fringe areas and public
housing estates, and for those with no fixed abode (ABS, 2012; Cole,
2012). Recent studies have concluded that disadvantaged groups
within Australia e including people in rural communities, refugee
communities, Indigenous communities and culturally and linguistically
diverse communities e are more likely to be victims of
digital exclusion (see Alam and Imran, 2015; Walton et al., 2013).
Surveys have indicated that the underpinning reasons for such a
divide in Australia cut across socio-economic, demographic, ethnic
and political factors (Alam and Imran, 2015; Atkinson et al., 2008;
Bowles, 2011; Lee, 2011; Rennie et al., 2013). For instance,
Atkinson et al. (2008) while exploring digital divide in Albany, a
regional city in Western Australia, found the presence of digital
divide in relation to age, education and income levels e an observation
that was mirrored in Bowles (2011). Consequently, in
recognition of these disparities, beliefs that the Internet will
enhance the grassroots development process, allowing many more
people to use on-line resources to engage, mobilise and participate
in public life directly in policy or rural development discussions still
remain a distant hope for rural regions in Australia (Zappal
a et al.,
2000; Charleson, 2012).
4. Methods
4.1. Proposed framework
Fig. 1 presents a framework developed following the literature
review on the three central concepts that form the fulcrum of this
study. From the preliminary review of the extant literature, it was
evidenced that the digital divide does influence rural partnership
status (Alexopoulos et al., 2010; Cresci and Jarosz, 2010); similarly
rural partnership systems influence development outcomes (Clark
et al., 2007; Derkzen et al., 2008). This paper thus presents this
existing relationship within a three-phased, bi-relational framework,
as shown in Fig. 1.
Interestingly, despite such an illustrated link among these
concepts, underlying factors which underscore such relationships
have not yet been empirically explored and tested. Thus, this paper
intends to inductively explore underscoring issues within each
central concept, hence promoting nuanced understandings of how
they influence each other. Following the ultimate aim of this study,
the illustrated framework poses three underlying research questions
(RQ), which this paper ultimately addresses:
RQ1: What is the state of the digital divide among community
groups within the Surat Resource Region?
RQ2: How does the digital divide influence rural partnerships'
performance?
RQ3: How do the partnership challenges of the digital divide
impact rural development?
4.2. Research approach, sampling and data collection
This study took an inductive research approach towards
addressing its guiding questions. Inductive research is a systematic
procedure for analysing qualitative data in which the analysis is
likely to be guided by specific evaluations (Thomas, 2006). The
approach involves detailed readings of the raw data to derive key
constructs, themes or models through researchers’ interpretations
of the raw data. Considering the ability of inductive approaches to
allow research findings to emerge from the frequent, dominant or
significant themes inherent in raw data (Gioia et al., 2012), this
approach is ideal for obtaining realistic constructs that underpin
the interrelationships between the digital divide, rural partnership
and rural development.
Data presented in this article were collected by the researchers
on four separate site visits within a four-month period (SeptembereDecember,
2014). During the data collection period, the researchers
held interviews and focus group discussions (FGDs) with
the purposively sampled population.
Interview findings and discussions were drawn from situated
engagement by the researchers with 30 respondents from seven
sampled rural community groups, as described in Table 1. All interviews
were tape-recorded, transcribed verbatim and transferred
into the NVivo software which was used for the data analysis. For
the purpose of the analysis captured in this paper, as all the seven
sampled rural community groups were coded RG1, RG2, RG3, RG4,
RG5, RG6 and RG7, interview respondents were coded R1, R2, R3 …
R30 respectively. After the interviews, two follow-up FGDs were
held in Chinchilla and Miles-Wandoan to validate the findings from
interview sessions. Here, the two FGDs were coded as Chinchilla
FGD (FGD1) and Miles-Wandoan FGD (FGD2). FGD participants
were then coded P1, P2, P3...P19. Participants included community
group leaders, local council staff, NGO representatives and legal
practitioners. The FGDs in each community were also recorded and
transcribed.
Qualitative thematic analysis was performed on the gathered
primary data. The researcher followed a stepebyestep process of
successfully handling the data analysis, which included organising
the data, finding and organising ideas and concepts, building overarching
themes in the data, and ensuring reliability and validity in
data analysis (O'Connor and Gibson, 2003).
Fig. 1. A framework showing the digital divide, rural partnership and development.
M.O. Erdiaw-Kwasie, K. Alam / Journal of Rural Studies 43 (2016) 214e224 217
4.3. Case study communities
The Surat Resource Region is renowned for producing agricultural
and energy resources for both domestic and international
consumption. Its natural endowment has attracted a number of
companies to operate within the region. Of the different forms of
unconventional gas, the most developed in Australia is coal seam
gas (CSG), which has rapidly expanded in the state of Queensland
over the past decade (Fleming and Measham, 2014; Geoscience
Australia, 2012; Keogh, 2013). According to Geoscience Australia
(2012), as of 2011, Queensland possessed over 90 per cent of the
country's known economically demonstrated resources of CSG, of
which the Surat Basin is a key host (see Fig. 2). In balancing priorities
between these conflicting sectors that form the backbone of
the region's economy, the Queensland Government is currently
mounting policies and strategies to ensure that accelerated growth
of the resources sector does not disadvantage the food and agricultural
sectors, the environment, or the communities' health and
wellbeing (Queensland Treasury and Trade, 2014).
As at 30 June 2013, the estimated resident population of the
Surat Basin Resource Region was 47,212. The region is comprised of
six towns (classified as statistical area level 2 (SA2)): Chinchilla,
Miles-Wandoan, Roma, Tara, Wambo and Roma Region
(Queensland Treasury and Trade, 2014), whose population dynamism
has influenced the constant increase in the region's population
over recent decades. Recent research by Queensland Treasury
and Trade (2012) indicated that much of this increase was due to
rapid development of CSG projects and the level of construction
Table 1
Interview sample description.
Sample Description
Size 30 respondents from seven rural community groups in the four sampled communities, namely: Chinchilla e 2; MileseWandoan e 1;
Roma e 3; and Wambo e 1
Criteria for selection The group must:
- be functional in the sampled community
- be willing to participate
- be located in a rural area in the region
- have a direct or indirect relationship with existing energy firms
Characteristics of group
respondents
Occupation: Farmers (75%), Miners (15%), Service providers (10%)
Education: Tertiary (35%), High school (55%), Others (10%)
Fig. 2. Map of the Surat basin resource region.
Source: Adapted from Queensland Treasury and Trade, 2014.
218 M.O. Erdiaw-Kwasie, K. Alam / Journal of Rural Studies 43 (2016) 214e224
activity in the rural areas.
In the Surat Resource Region, large corporations in the mining
industry use their community information centres as an interface
for interaction with local groups and residents, where the face-toface
approach is not uncommon (Hilson, 2011). However, in recent
times, digital (online) approaches to stakeholder interactions have
gained popularity as an emerging engagement technique among
operating firms. The complexities associated with these newer
approaches are evidenced among populations living in the town
centres and the rural regions. This study describes the rural areas
within the case regions as places located more than 5 km from a
town.
The Surat Resource Region forms part of the Western Downs,
where it has been estimated that 90 per cent of households have
computers and over 85 per cent of households have home access to
the Internet (Alam and Salahuddin, 2015). This suggests a high
connectivity for the region as a whole. However, it is difficult to
determine the connectivity rate of the Surat Resource Region, as
region-specific data are lacking. Given that the population of the six
statistical areas which make up the Surat Resource Region reflect
the regional socio-demographic average, it can be inferred that the
Surat Resource Region has a similar connectivity level. However,
the digital chasm among the case regions varies.
5. Results
To deconstruct the traditional conceptualisation of the digital
divide, and to gain a more holistic understanding of its dimensions,
the present study addresses the three basic questions posited by
the proposed framework.
5.1. What is the state of the digital divide among community groups
within the Surat Resource Region?
The data obtained from the interviews and FGDs held within the
sample local communities unveiled that the digital divide manifests
among local community groups in three basic forms: (i) ‘Not
having ICT’ (lack of digital physical access/connectivity), (ii) ‘Having
ICT but being unable to use it’ (lack of skills and knowledge), and
(iii) ‘Its attributes do not meet expectations’ (digital contents).
It was evidenced from the findings that the dimensions of the
digital divide vary among individual communities. Interestingly,
despite such variation, the observed trend from the study data
indicated that digital connectivity has significantly increased. This
can be confirmed through a common view shared by some respondents
that physical access to computers and the Internet is
gradually becoming a common asset; and as access increases,
concerns about access is becoming a thing of the past among many
community groups. However, closer examination of the data
revealed that digital access is still a cause for concern within local
community groups, but has changed and taken up new forms.
Across all of the participants, digital access barriers manifest
themselves where a person has a computer but no Internet e a very
common situation in rural locations within the sampled regions. As
indicated:
“Our group has its own computers but no reliable source of Internet
… so we usually use these computers to store records of [the]
group's activities and data, but not for any form of communication
with energy firms” (R1 e RG1).
“Our group is new and used to be part of an older group located in
town. At the moment, we are located further from the town centre
and have no Internet at our place of meeting. We try to handle
things manually in terms of information dissemination among
members and interactions with firms” (R1, RG5).
The consequences of such a ‘half’ divide access pattern was
described by participants in terms of the same social problems that
accompany the ‘full digital divide’, ranging from economic to cultural
and learning inequalities.
Also, a significant proportion of the sampled group respondents
emphatically stated that, the digital training dimension of the
divide is a great challenge; this trend was reflected in all FGDs. A
significant number of the interviewed group respondents revealed
that local council plans towards creating a digital economy exclusively
focus on increasing access to computers and the Internet, but
the knowledge of how and why ICT can be a key resource is poorly
addressed, particularly within rural settings. A respondent clearly
shared that:
“......Many of our members lack the technical know-how for managing
the use of the Internet. We usually communicate with
members through emails, but many still prefer the face-to-face
approach to information sharing” (R1, RG2).
Participants at the FGDs also described instances where there is
the presence of computers and the Internet in many homes of
group members, however, these continue to be underutilised. In
cases where such resources are utilised, more focus has been placed
on the usual online chats with friends and families, rather than uses
for any community group-related activities such as emails, online
surveys and knowledge sharing.
Increasingly, however, community groups are developing strategies
which incorporate digital literacy into most programs they
organise for members. Several participants suggested that such
training has been helpful, but there is a long way to go towards
realising the purpose and its end value.
“[The] majority of rural groups have limited knowledge of the
Internet. [Some] groups have introduced new basic training programs
to help equip members with needed skills. The problem is
[these groups have limited human resources and so their] current
capacity to provide training remains limited” (P1, FGD 2).
A significant portion of participants indicated that the low level
of IT literacy (the ability to use IT for a range of purposes and the
associated skills required) among communities has contributed to
the divide dimension among many rural groups. In addition, those
who volunteer to help other group members to acquire such skills
are often poorly trained themselves; furthermore, groups usually
have limited equipment with which to carry out the training
sessions.
A final point relates to the content dimension of the digital
chasm, in which the Internet is utilised but the knowledge gap and
biased digital content yield user dissatisfaction, which dissuades
them from future engagement with information technology. Many
group respondents clearly indicated their anxiety regarding the
language used on the Internet. Several group-leader interviewees
also suggested that issues discussed on community web pages and
other related sites were gradually being clouded by the activities of
the CSG industry.
“… Community online pages, which used to update us on new
community developments, are gradually losing [their] value.
Nothing relevant to our wellbeing is shared other than the usual
lies of the CSG [industry]” (R1, RG6).
“Companies' activities only benefit town-centre residents and
groups. Thus, going online to see the same usual stories is worrisome.
M.O. Erdiaw-Kwasie, K. Alam / Journal of Rural Studies 43 (2016) 214e224 219
We hardly use emails as [a] petition channel to firms because they
don't take them seriously. Thus, hopping onto the Internet to interact
with firms is a waste of time” (R2, RG5).
These findings were further supported by outcomes of the FGDs,
where several participants showed their frustration and shared
that community digital forums, such as social media sites, have
now become ‘platforms’ crowded with rhetoric and promises of the
energy companies.
5.2. How does the divide influence rural partnerships status?
Thematic analysis of the interviews and FGDs evidenced three
central themes as the impacts that the digital divide has on rural
partnerships’ status. These are: (i) mismatches in interest, (ii) power
inequalities, and (iii) exclusion.
Internet network coverage is limited on most rural groups’
properties. This critical issue was highlighted in both FGDs of the
study. Several participants argued that the poor network services
within the range of their properties is a great challenge.
“I live on the farm … this reminds me. Over a year ago, a property
holders' group [of which] I happen to be a member were told about
an upcoming online engagement forum. The usual few lucky towncentre
social groups ended up being used for the survey with some
incentives for members … all because it was ascertained that the
survey was purely online” (R2, RG1).
Participants expressed their discontent and suggested that
outcomes of such problematic and biased engagement approaches
do not address the true concerns of rural communities.
One key issue highlighted by participants in the FGDs was the
comparison between digital engagement approaches and face-toface
approaches. Participants acknowledged the weakness of the
face-to-face form of community engagement, where company officials
meet up with community residents to deliberate on pressing
issues. However, participants were more strongly opposed to the
ramifications of the digital approach. As the digital engagement
approach within rural regions is characterised by the involvement
of just those members of the population who have satisfactory
Internet and network access, the perceived community need does
not always match the reality.
“… being cut off, or having limited chances to add input to decisions
that matter to our progress, makes the quality of such partnership
questionable” (R3, RG5).
In other words, the face-to-face approach creates platforms for
wider participation compared to the digital or virtual approach,
particularly in rural regions where the quality of the network access
is doubtful. Participants therefore indicated that the digital divide
marginalises rural groups and prevents them from contributing to
decisions that impact upon them. Generally speaking, the emergence
of digitised stakeholder engagement practices can derail the
relationships that rural communities establish with development
actors. According to some participants, such interactions are characterised
by struggles and conflicts as the exclusions and inequities
increase.
Considering these observations, it is unsurprising that the digital
divide does increases the power imbalance within rural partnerships
between rural groups and firms. As shared, that
information is power, and power has a relational character (Lappe
and DuBois, 1994; Erdiaw-Kwasie et al., 2015), a significant number
of participants argued that a breakdown in communicative
action through ineffective information channels can naturally
hamper achieving power-equity within rural partnerships.
“… Yes, the law gives power. However, in today's business world,
solving power differences within rural partnerships goes beyond
the law …” (P1, FGD 1).
Several interviewees expressed their concerns and indicated
that digitised engagement practices by firms with local groups will
compound the power chasm, which has its roots in the resources
legislation of the state government.
Rural communities suffer when corporations fail to tailor partnerships
to the various manifestations of the digital divide. A
participant clearly suggested that:
“… I think digital initiatives by firms in their operations are of
paramount importance. What is missing is when and how to blend
well such digital initiatives with local conditions, and this has
sidelined efforts of rural groups in such relationship[s]” (P2, FGD 2).
Other responses also confirmed that communities continue to
struggle with the digital divide, which limits their power in influencing
corporate decisions, and consequently limits their development
as a community.
Moreover, study data revealed that social development initiatives
are often conceived in the premises of firms rather than
through thorough participation with the beneficiaries. Several interviewees
described the current engagement pattern of the firms
as ‘selective’, as it is geared towards areas where they can easily
gain publicity for their actions, to the detriment of rural areas,
which suffer most from such mining operations.
“… Due to the prevalence of the divide in rural regions, firms easily
interact with local groups in the town centre more than rural ones.
Thus, major developed social initiatives tend to strengthen and
support goals of town-centre groups more than their rural counterparts”
(R1, RG3).
A significant portion of the participants commented that, what
may be perceived by firms as key priority needs of local communities
may, in reality, not reflect the true needs of the entire
community.
Reflections from the FGDs enunciated and confirmed the findings
of earlier interviews. As participants tried to dissect the impacts
of the divide, in the context of the interests of both the firms
and rural community groups, the issue of ‘self-prioritised’ needs
came to the fore. From the perspective of the participants, firms
cannot pursue proper community development agenda in rural
regions without a critical reconsideration of the roles of local
community groups e who tend to serve as the local engine to foster
local growth.
5.3. How do partnership challenges of the divide influence rural
development?
Thematic analysis of the study's data found three broad themes
that illustrate the repercussions of partnership challenges of the
divide for rural development initiative outcomes. Here, development
outcomes tend to be (i) unsustainable, (ii) lopsided, and (iii)
non-participatory.
The data unveiled that as partnership systems are continuously
eroded by the diverse dimensions of the divide, non-participatory
forms of development emerge in their place. Shared comments
by key actors of sampled community groups indicated that, a
partnership with a huge power imbalance is more likely to give rise
220 M.O. Erdiaw-Kwasie, K. Alam / Journal of Rural Studies 43 (2016) 214e224
to outcomes that are devoid of actual voices of beneficiaries of such
development interventions. During the FGDs, participants unveiled
an interesting argument around how the technology-oriented
engagement approach is eroding the traditional principle of
participation in firms’ interactions with host rural community
groups. Several participants agreed that the technology gap leaves
passive participation as the only option available to many rural
groups, as they are only informed of proposed corporate plans after
prior consultation with prioritised partners.
Also, study findings clearly showed that partnership challenges
have negative implications for the sustainability of development
programs and project outcomes initiated by energy companies.
Significant numbers of respondents indicated that the sustainability
of the outcomes of development initiatives hugely depends
on its partnership source e whereas a healthy and mutual source
provides enabling environments for such outcomes to thrive well,
the converse is also true.
“… To me one thing is obvious, if the root is weak the tree will surely
fall soon. They [energy firms] have not done things right with
working with rural community groups. Thus, whatever develops
from such a sick partnership will not last” (R2, RG3).
“… The current partnerships between the energy firms and many
rural groups makes [each] development intervention to appear
more of a casual gift than [a] true development initiative” (R3,
RG2).
Sustainability (or otherwise) of development outcomes was an
issue of great interest to the participants as they discussed why
some community projects fail or are short-lived. Several participants
concurred that the weak relationships between rural community
groups and firms cause corporate-led development
initiatives to lack adequate support from the local population.
Location preference emerged as a key factor when assessing the
status of the partnership systems that firms create with local
groups. Study findings showed that local groups based in the town
centres are considered the first point of contact and are prioritised
by existing firms in their engagement policies and practices due to
their adequate access to digital resources. On the other hand,
groups located on the outskirts of the town face partnership challenges
of the divideein terms of finding enabling environments to
make their claims heard and have them addressed, as well as
influencing overall corporate development decisions.
“On a good day where energy firms want to do something right
with their development programs, they capture views of some local
groups. But it is always them [the town-centre local groups] (e.g.
social clubs) who have a reliable digital access. Rural groups (e.g.
property holders' groups), which fight for [the] rights of rural folks,
are only considered when they [firms] need a property to host their
wells” (P2, FGD 1).
“Development only goes to areas where the public can see their socalled
good works. This camouflage kind of development is for their
enlightened interests and makes community development a more
one-sided thing” (R4, RG5).
“… more pressing needs of us [community residents] are less prioritised
by firms, given that our groups, who are greatly challenged
by inadequate digital access, have limited chance to influence
development decisions sponsored by operating firms” (R1, RG4).
According to the study data, the digital divide is one critical
factor that has accounted for such a dichotomy between towncentre
local groups and the rural groups. This produces
unbalanced, inequitable development from the outset.
6. Discussion
The study results provide key insights into three core rural
concepts: the digital divide, rural partnerships and rural development,
which the existing literature shows are closely interrelated.
Holistically viewed, the study results improve and expand upon the
initial framework derived from the preliminary literature review;
thus, Fig. 3 shows a revised framework that requires quantitative
validation.1
The digital divide challenge was evidenced among rural community
groups, and this was manifested in three central themes:
access, skills and content. The presence of the access and skills
dimensions of the divide concurs with the findings of recent similar
works (Alam and Imran, 2015; Atkinson et al., 2008; Bowles, 2011;
Lee, 2011). Though we see some signs of decline in the divide due to
improvements in the telecommunication network and physical
access to ICT among rural groups, the study results showed that
rural groups are recording improved access to digital devices
without the Internet. In cases where the Internet is available,
ITeliterate people within rural groups are few, and do not constitute
a strong enough human resource for their respective groups.
The data also provided empirical evidence supporting what Servon
(2002) described as a divide situation wherein people access the
Internet but are limited by a knowledge gap that separates them
from any meaningful understanding of issues shared. The study
findings identified that users’ expectations and interests constitute
key determinants in addressing the content dimension of the digital
divide in the rural context.
In exploring the impacts that the digital divide can have on rural
partnership systems, the present study results found three key
impacts: mismatched interests, widened power-inequality, and
exclusion. Evidence showed that the industry's traditional face-toface
community consultation is gradually being replaced by more
digital engagement approaches, which are perceived as more costeffective
and easily accessible for stakeholder. Looking at the study
results and revisiting the purported digital claims, the impacts that
many digital proponents hoped it could have on rural partnership
systems still remains a mirage, and worst of all, has led to new
partnership challenges that have exacerbated the plight of rural
community groups. Study data showed that as corporations strive
to go digital in their operations, a significant number of disadvantaged
groups continue to struggle with access to the skills, tools and
resources needed to digitally engage. Thus, findings suggest the
need for engagement approaches to be significantly sensitive to
different actors' participation abilities, power relations and their
digital capacities at play, in cross-rural partnerships.
In addition, what became clear during the study is the direct
impact that partnership systems have on rural development outcomes.
The data suggested that many actors come in to play when
we talk about a region's development, and that overlooking the role
that each partner plays has irreversible consequences on development
outcomes. It is therefore evidenced that partnership challenges
of the digital divide negatively affect rural development
initiatives, where outcomes lack local knowledge and support. We
critically observe that the issue of ‘self-prioritised’ local needs by
firms is a travesty to the whole idea of grassroots development, as it
compromises on the significance of locals' input within the development
process. To quote Schumacher: ‘[If] the people … are
1 It is imperative to empirically test the constructs in the proposed framework
using quantitative techniques, as it will help validate the findings presented in this
paper and ultimately refine the study's framework.
M.O. Erdiaw-Kwasie, K. Alam / Journal of Rural Studies 43 (2016) 214e224 221
helped to help themselves, I have no doubt that a genuine development
will ensue … [But it] cannot be “produced” by skillful
grafting operations carried out by foreign technicians or an indigenous
elite that has lost contact with the ordinary people.’ (Schumacher
cited in Frynas, 2005, p. 589).
In their attempts to understand how rural development setbacks
arising from the digital divide can be addressed, several
participants suggested that firms' partnership policies and approaches
should be sensitive to the prevailing conditions within a
given locality, as the digital capacity of regions varies. This finding
supports a similar observation made by Furmankiewicz et al.
(2010), when considering rural partnerships within the Polish
local government set up. This study further affirms the relevance of
digital empowerment of local communities as an ideal pathway
towards offsetting rural partnership challenges, particularly in the
case of resource communities and social impact industries. Interestingly,
contemporary exigencies necessitate organisational social
responsibilities to be built around communities’ needs and expectations,
while also providing room for community empowerment
(Erdiaw-Kwasie et al., 2015; Idemudia and Ite, 2006). Conspicuously,
digital empowerment of rural groups and regions has the
potentials to positively influence rural partnership systems and
grassroots development outcomes (see Furmankiewicz et al., 2014;
Townsend et al., 2013).
7. Conclusion
This paper presented a new dimension of the rural partnership
development studies debate. Though rural development has been
coined around initiatives undertaken by partnerships between
local communities and other stakeholders such as local government
institutions, businesses and NGOs, little has been seen in rural
studies on how the emerging global canker e the digital divide e
influences the effectiveness of rural partnerships. From the perspectives
of mining and rural partnership development, this remains
polarised. The study findings add to the stream of knowledge
in this emerging field in rural studies by providing suggestions that
has policy and empirical implications.
In policy and practice terms, this study makes a significant
contribution towards an understanding of the divide-induced
tensions existing within rural partnership development; these
can serve as a guide to rural planners and development practitioners.
As the paper presents key social issues associated with the
divide from a rural perspective, it calls for significant reforms in
resource development policy initiatives. Ideally, rural community
groups may become advocates for local development initiatives.
However, stewardship may not occur if rural groups feel the
engagement practices of firms do not provide enough support for
them to play significant roles in the resource development process,
as well as reshaping development initiatives towards meeting societal
expectations. This is a key finding also worth consideration
among policy makers in government institutions, corporations,
international development agencies and NGOs, who interact and
partner with rural regions in diverse ways.
Further, as the ‘going digital’ slogan gains popularity within the
global business hemisphere, study findings confirm that rural
mining communities lag behind in terms of access, knowledge and
content in adapting to the digital pace. Thus, there is the need for a
more responsive and localised partnership analytical approach
within social impact industries (e.g. resource industry) that can
inform meaningful dialogue, open decisionemaking and sharing of
mutual futures. The absence of such analytical approaches to guide
the practices of developers can result in a loss of trust and conflict
of interest, and may in some extreme cases reduce the partnership
interface to a battleground where consensus is hard to reach. This
paper can therefore serve as a pathway in efforts towards developing
meaningful partnership analytical approaches that can
enable disadvantaged groups to participate in today's digitally
connected economy and society. This can, in turn, provide the kind
of enhancement necessary to make rural development initiatives a
success.
The paper, however, reveals two critical concerns worth investigating
in future studies. First, considering that the study interviews
were mainly conducted with local communities and not
mining companies, exploring the corporate view is timely, as it can
open up a different side of presented argument. Second, this paper
ascertains that quality partnerships require not only institutional
changes e particularly changes in procedures for decisionemaking
and control over resources, but also a focus on enhancing the capabilities
of rural regions to exercise their new rights and responsibilities
in the whole resource development process. Thus,
there is the need for future research to focus attention on how local
empowerment initiatives within rural regions can help overcome
the digital divide challenge to help build healthy partnerships. It is
such a partnership type that can help rural communities to take
charge of their own development e a mechanism that defines
meaningful local development from a rural perspective.
Fig. 3. The Divide-Partnership-Development framework.
222 M.O. Erdiaw-Kwasie, K. Alam / Journal of Rural Studies 43 (2016) 214e224
Acknowledgement
We would like to thank the University of Southern Queensland,
Australia for funding this research mainly through the Postgraduate
Research Scholarship as well as partly through the Collaborative
Research Network Program. We also acknowledge the valuable
comments and suggestions made by the participants in the Symposium
on Broadband-enabled Communities and Regional Development
held at the University of South Queensland, Toowoomba
during November 10e11, 2014. The authors are grateful to Clare
Harris, who assisted with the proof reading of this article. Thanks
also to the anonymous referees of Journal of Rural Studies and Dr.
David E. Beel, member of the guest editorial team for this special
issue, for insightful comments on earlier drafts of the paper.
References
Alam, K., Imran, S., 2015. The digital divide and social inclusion among refugee
migrants: a case in regional Australia. Inf. Technol. People 28 (2), 1e14.
Alam, K., Salahuddin, M., 2015. Assessing Digital Divide and its Determinants: a
Case Study on Households' Perception in the Western Downs Region. Australian
Digital Futures Institute and Australian Centre for Sustainable Business and
Development, University of Southern Queensland, Toowoomba.
Alexopoulos, G., Koutsouris, A., Tzouramani, I., 2010. Adoption and use of ICTs
among rural youth: evidence from Greece. Int. J. ICT Hum. Dev. 2 (3), 1e18.
Atkinson, J., Black, R., Curtis, A., 2008. Exploring the digital divide in an Australian
regional city: a case study of Albany. Aust. Geogr. 39 (4), 479e493.
Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS), 2013. A Review of Regional Development
Australia Committee 2010-11 Regional Plans: Issues Identified by Regions. Cat
no. 1318.0. Australian Bureau of Statistics, Canberra.
Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS), 2012. Internet Activity June 2012. Cat no.
8153.0. Australian Bureau of Statistics, Canberra.
Bice, S., 2013. No more sun shades, please: experiences of corporate social responsibility
in remote Australian mining communities. Rural. Soc. 22 (2),
138e152.
Borisov, D., Serban, E., 2013. The digital divide in Romania e a statistical analysis.
Econ. Ser. Manag. 15 (1), 347e355.
Bowles, M., 2012. Digital Economy and Regional Futures: ICT Future Foresight.
Innovation and Business Skills Australia, Melbourne.
Bowles, M., 2011. Realizing the Full Socio-economic Promise of the National
Broadband Network (NBN) in Preparing All Regions of Australia for Participation
in the Digital Economy. Innovation and Business Skills Australia,
Melbourne.
Chambers, R., 2008. Revolutions in Development Inquiry. Earthscan, London and
Sterling, VA.
Charleson, D.M., 2012. Bridging the digital divide: enhancing empowerment and
social capital. J. Soc. Inclusion 3 (2), 6e19.
Chigbu, U.E., 2013. Fostering rural Sense of place: the missing piece in Uturu,
Nigeria. Dev. Pract. 23 (2), 264e277.
Clark, D., Southern, R., Beer, J., 2007. Rural governance, community empowerment
and the new institutionalism: a case study of the Isle of Wight. J. Rural Stud. 23,
254e266.
Cisler, S., 2000. Subtract the Digital Divide. Online essay. Retrieved 7 July, 2013.
http://home.inreach.com/cisler/divide.htm.
Cornwall, A., Lucas, H., Pasteur, K., 2000. Introduction: accountability through
participation: developing workable partnership models in the health sector. IDS
Bull. 31 (1), 1e13.
Cole, J., 2012. World Internet Project, fourth ed. University of Southern California,
United States.
Cresci, M.K., Jarosz, P.A., 2010. Bridging the digital divide for urban seniors: community
partnership. Geriatr. Nurs. 31 (6), 455e463.
CSIRO, 2012. Coal Seam Gas Developmentsdpredicting Impacts. CSIRO, Australia.
http://www.csiro.au/news/~/media/3C0EBC3E287F436880FDB5959B0796D0.
ashx.
Dax, T., 2014. The evolution of european rural policy. In: Copus, A., de Lima, P. (Eds.),
Territorial Cohesion in Rural Europe: the Relational Turn in Rural Development.
Routledge, London.
Davis, R., Franks, D.M., 2014. Costs of Company-community Conflict in the Extractive
Sector. Corporate Social Responsibility Initiative Report No. 66. Harvard
Kennedy School, Cambridge, MA.
Derkzen, P., Franklin, A., Bock, B., 2008. Examining power struggles as a signifier of
successful partnership working: a case study of partnership dynamics. J. Rural
Stud. 24, 458e466.
Erdiaw-Kwasie, M.O., Alam, K., Shahiduzzaman, Md, 2015. Towards understanding
stakeholder salience transition and relational approach to better corporate
social responsibility: a case for a proposed model in practice. J. Bus. Ethics.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10551-015-2805-z (Article published online).
Erdiaw-Kwasie, M.O., Khorshed, A., Shahiduzzaman, M., 2014a. Bettering corporate
social responsibility through empowerment and effective engagement practices:
an Australian mining perspective. In: Higgins, C., Hendry, J.R. (Eds.),
Proceedings of the Twenty-fifth Annual Meeting of the International Association
for Business and Society, pp. 140e150.
Erdiaw-Kwasie, M.O., Khorshed, A., Shahiduzzaman, M., 2014b. Engagement,
empowerment and rural mining communities. In: Keppell, M., Reushie, S. (Eds.),
Proceedings of the Digital Rural Futures Conference. University of Southern
Queensland, Australia, pp. 36e37.
Ertuna, B., Kirbas, G., 2012. Local community involvement in rural tourism development:
the case of Kastamonu, Turkey. PASOS 10 (2), 17e24.
Ewing, S., 2013. The Digital Divide: Narrowing but Deepening. Swinburne University
of Technology, Melbourne, Australia.
Fałkowski, J., 2013. Political accountability and governance in rural areas: some
evidence from the pilot programme LE ADER þ in Poland. J. Rural Stud. 32,
70e79.
Fleming, D.A., Measham, T.G., 2014. Local economic impacts of an unconventional
energy boom: the coal seam gas Industry in Australia. Aust. J. Agric. Resour.
Econ. 58.
Frynas, J., 2005. The false developmental promise of Corporate Social Responsibility:
evidence from multinational companies. Int. Aff 81 (3), 581e598.
Furmankiewicz, M., Macken -Walsh, A., Stefa  nska, J., 2014. Territorial governance,
networks and power: cross-sectoral partnerships in rural Poland. Geogr. Ann.
Ser. B, Hum. Geogr. 96 (4), 345e361.
Furmankiewicz, M., Thompson, N., Zielinska, M., 2010. Area-based partnerships in
rural Poland: the post-accession experience. J. Rural Stud. 26, 52e62.
Geddes, M., 2006. Partnership and the limits to local governance in England:
institutionalist analysis and neoliberalism. Int. J. Urban Reg. Res 30 (1), 76e97.
Geoscience Australia (GA), 2012. Australian Gas Resource Assessment 2012.
Australian Government, Canberra.
Gioia, D., Corley, K., Hamilton, A., 2012. Seeking qualitative rigor in inductive
research: notes on the gioia methodology. Organ. Res. Methods 16 (1), 15e31.
Hilson, G., 2011. Inherited commitments: do changes in ownership affect Corporate
Social Responsibility (CSR) at African gold mines. Afr. J. Bus. Manag. 5 (27),
10921e10939.
Howland, J., 1998. The ‘digital divide’: are we becoming a world of technological
‘haves’ and ‘have-nots’? Electron. Libr. 16 (5), 287e289.
Idemudia, U.O., Ite, U.E., 2006. Corporateecommunity relations in Nigeria's oil industry:
challenges and imperatives'. Corp. Soc. Responsib. Environ. Manag. 14
(3), 194e206.
Ismail, M., 2009. Corporate social responsibility and its role in community development:
an international perspective. J. Int. Soc. Res. 2 (9), 200e209.
Jarboe, K.P., 2001. Inclusion in the Information Age: Reframing the Debate ([Online
report]. Athena Alliance).
Jenkins, H., Obara, L., 2006. Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) in the mining
industry e the risk of community dependency. In: Proceedings of the Corporate
Social Responsibility Conference. Available at: http://www.crrconference.org/
downloads/2006jenkinsobara.pdf.
Jones, O., 2006. Non-human rural studies. In: Cloke, P., Marsden, T., Mooney, P.H.
(Eds.), The Handbook of Rural Studies. Sage, London, pp. 185e200.
Keegan, M., Nguyen, N.C., 2011. Systems thinking, rural development and food security:
key leverage points for Australia's regional development and population
policy. Migr. Aust. (launch issue) 1 (1), 50e64.
Kemp, D., Owen, J., Gotzmann, N., Bond, C., 2011. Just relations and companycommunity
conflict in mining. J. Bus. Ethics 101, 93e109.
Kemp, D., 2010. Community relations in the global mining industry: exploring the
internal dimensions of externally oriented work. Corp. Soc. Responsib. Environ.
Manag. 17, 1e14.
Keogh, L., 2013. The first four wells: unconventional gas in Australia. M/C J. A J.
Media Cult. 16. http://journal.media-culture.org.au/index.php/mcjournal/
article/viewArticle/617.
Kolawole, O.D., Ajila, K., 2015. Driving local community transformation through
participatory rural entrepreneurship development. World J. Entrepreneurship
Manag. Sustain. Dev. 11 (2), 131e139.
Kotey, B., Rolfe, J., 2014. Demographic and economic impact of mining on remote
communities in Australia. Resour. Policy 42, 65e72.
Koutsouris, A., 2006. ICTs and rural development: beyond the hype. J. Ext. Syst. 22
(1), 46e62.
Lappe, F.M., Dubois, P.M., 1994. The Quickening of America: Rebuilding Our Nation,
Remaking Our Lives. Jossey-Bass, Inc. Publishers, San Francisco.
Lee, D., 2011. The digital divide: the Australian government's role in addressing
‘ability’. Telecommun. J. Aust. 61 (2), 251e258.
Macken-Walsh, A., 2010. Towards a transverse inter-sectoral debate? A case study of
the Rural Partnership Programme (RPP) in post-socialist Lithuania. East. Eur.
Countrys 16 (2), 45e64.
Malecki, E.J., 2003. Digital development in rural areas: potentials and pitfalls.
J. Rural Stud. 19, 201e214.
Marquardt, D., Mollers, J., Buchenrieder, G., 2012. Social networks and rural €
development: LE ADER in Romania. Sociol. Rural. 52 (4), 398e431.
Moseley, M.J., 2003. Rural Development: Principles and Practice. SAGE, London.
Muthuri, J.N., Mwaura, K., 2006. The digital divide and CSR in Africa: the need for
corporate law reform. In: Visser, et al. (Eds.), Corporate Citizenship in Africa
Chapter 16. Greenleaf Publishing, Sheffield.
O'Connor, H., Gibson, N., 2003. A step-by-step guide to qualitative data analysis. A J.
Indig. Aborig. Community Health 1 (1), 63e90.
OECD., 2013. Economic Outlook. Organization of Economic Cooperation and
Development, Paris.
Peck, J.A., Tickell, A., 1994. Too many partnerships. The future for regeneration
M.O. Erdiaw-Kwasie, K. Alam / Journal of Rural Studies 43 (2016) 214e224 223
partnerships. Local Econ. 9 (3), 251e265.
Philip, L.J., Townsend, L., Roberts, E., Beel, D., 2015. The rural digital economy. Scott.
Geogr. J. 131 (3/4), 143e147.
Queensland Treasury and Trade, 2014. Queensland Regional Profiles: Resident
Profile for Surat Basin Resource Region. Queensland Government Statistician’s
Office, Brisbane.
Ray, C., 2000. Endogenous socio-economic development in the European Union e
issues of evaluation. J. Rural Stud. 16, 447e458.
Ray, C., 2005. Neo-endogenous rural development in the EU. In: Cloke, P.,
Marsden, T., Mooney, P. (Eds.), Handbook of Rural Studies. Sage Publications,
London.
Rennie, E., Crouch, A., Wright, A., Thomas, J., 2013. At home on the outstation:
barriers to home internet in remote indigenous communities. Telecommun.
Policy 37, 583e593.
Servon, L.J., 2002. Bridging the Digital Divide: Technology, Community and Public
Policy. Blackwell Publishing, United States.
Shaxon, L., 2011. Evidence-based agricultural and rural policy development e a
view from the UK on linking research and policy. In: Proceedings of the 122th
EAAE Seminar: Evidence-based Agricultural and Rural Policy Making: Methodological
and Empirical Challenges of Policy Evaluation Ancona, February 17-
18, 2011.
Strover, S., 2003. Remapping the digital divide. Inf. Soc. 19, 275e277.
Sutherland, J., 2004. America is addicted to the Internet, burgers and drugs: a nation
in decline or a glimpse of the future? Guard. G2 Supplement, 6 December,
London.
Thomas, D.R., 2006. A general inductive approach for analyzing qualitative
