Article
Justice in technology policy: A systematic review of gender divide literature and the marginal contribution of women on ICT
Introduction
Section:Next section
The role of information and communication technologies (ICT) as a tool for development has attracted the sustained attention of the world over recent years.

The term ICT has been used to encompass technological innovation and convergence in information and communication that lead to the development of so-called information or knowledge societies, with resulting changes in social interaction, economic and business practices, political engagement, education, health, leisure and entertainment (Ramilo and Villanueva, 2001). Over the past decade, there has been a growing understanding that these technologies can be powerful instruments for economic and social development through creation of new types of economic activity, employment opportunities, improvements in health-care delivery and other services and the enhancement of networking, participation and advocacy within society. Also, ICTs have role of potential to improve interaction between governments and citizens, fostering transparency and accountability in governance. While the potential of ICT for stimulating economic growth, socioeconomic development and effective governance is well-recognized, the benefits of ICT have been unevenly distributed within and between countries (Nancy, 2005).

The term “digital divide” refers to difference in resources and capabilities to access and effective utilize ICT for development that exist within and between countries, regions, sectors and socio-economic groups. The digital divide is often characterized by low levels of access to technologies. Poverty, illiteracy, lack of computer literacy and language barriers are among the factors impeding access to ICT infrastructure, especially in developing countries. Internet usage figures collected by the International Telecommunications Union in 2003 illustrate this gap in access.

As the gender dimensions of ICT – in terms of access and use, capacity-building opportunities, employment and potential for empowerment – are explicitly identified and addressed, ICT can be a powerful tool for political and social empowerment of women and the promotion of gender equality.

Today, the importance of gender equality not only as one of the basic human rights but also as a means of reducing poverty, raising living standards, appropriate growth and economic stability is being emphasized. Moreover, the relationship which exists between the concepts of democracy, development and equality is axiomatic (Sadeghi-Fasayi and Kolhor, 2007). World summits on the information society have already lead to ratification of documents which focus on women’s role and position in information society. Article 12 of the principles’ announcement emphasizes that ICTs gives women a lot of opportunities and introduce them as inevitable and main actors in information community (Sarraf, 2006). Moreover, during the preliminary conference of European ministers in the world summit of information society, emphasis was given to gender equality in all sectors of ICT, including users, producers and policymakers (Motamed-Nejad, 2003).

In relation to the users, it is undoubtedly clear that women make up half or more of the population of a society. Removing the obstacles to access information they would naturally be the active users of this area. On the other hand, if women are given free and equal access to education, employment, political participation and communication, they will be had considerable impact on information and communication as producers and policymakers. Therefore, to successfully accomplish this mission, structural reform to increase women’s participation in political and social life of the current information societies is vital.

Currently, the role of users in design is receiving widespread attention. Concepts such as “user-centered design” and “design for all” are frequently used by designers and policymakers interested in questions of equal access to new technologies, particularly new ICTs. Since the late 1980s, the paradigm in design theory has shifted from technology-oriented design to user-oriented design (Brouwer-Janse, 1996; Friedman, 1989; Norman and Draper, 1986)[1].

In the era of user-centered design, several scholars have started to take a closer look at gender as one of the decisive factors for successful innovation. While technology, and specifically information technology (IT), has become the backbone of almost all industries and a key driver for innovation, women are still largely absent from these fields. They are heavily underrepresented as technology designers and neglected as autonomous users with individual needs.

Most of studies that are related to women in information and communication fields analyzed women’s free access to information and increase their capabilities.

Women’s junior position in designing the ICT infrastructures is considerably noticed, and this study aims to investigate the effective participation of women in this field. Also, this study provides a summary of critical gender equality issues related to ICT and developing potential opportunities for women’s economic and social empowerment.

This paper provided systematic literature review of available research evidence on marginal participation of women in ICT-related jobs. In this study, it has been attempted to identify gaps in these literature studies according to the Global Index of Gender dimensions and briefly has been explained guidelines for policymakers to improve the participation of women in this area.

Global indicator of gender inequality
Section:Previous sectionNext section
Exactly, studies have been done about relationship of women’s role and their positions in various communities out during the previous decades. It brought considerable changes in decreasing gender divide in some areas. A Global Indicator of Gender Inequality is essential to determine the gender gap in various fields. The index was first introduced in 2006 by the World Economic Forum. It is a comparison index between two sexes which introduce differences between two sexes in four dimensions of political, economic, educational and health. Gender Gap is considered as a subcategory of digital divide. Susan Teltscher, the UN conference on trade and development, defines digital divide as the male-dominated nature of the world on ICT (Ahmadnia, 2004). According to a published report by the center of research and economic studies, gender inequality in each of these dimensions of political, economic, education and health studies is observed by measuring desired components within these dimensions (Taghizadeh, 2013). Accordingly, the review of literature in this study is based on the same four dimensions of the Global Gender Indicator, which it accepted by considered an example.

To better understand gender factors, desired components have been graphically illustrated in Figure 1. Based on 2013 gender divide report, results indicate the elimination of gender inequality in health sector by 96 per cent, in education by 93 per cent, in economic participation by 60 per cent and in political empowerment by 21 per cent. However, no country in the world has ever achieved gender equality.

Methodology
Section:Previous sectionNext section
This study is review of literature and conducted on basic guidelines in method of Tranfield et al. (2003). Tranfield’s guidelines provided for fields of knowledge management. However, it can be used for similar areas such as library and information science and other social sciences. A systematic literature review means that research has specific and systematic steps and divided into three steps:

planning the review;
conducting the review; and
reporting and disseminating the review (Tranfield et al., 2003).
The first step – planning the review – mainly sets out the motivation of the review, which is presented in Figure 1 in the present literature review. The selection of these articles was based on the four dimensions of the Global Gender Index (Chart 1) and randomly in the period 2000 to 2014. The second step – conducting the review – starts with identifying relevant research. To identify relevant journal articles on topic of this study, key words search on the following databases was conducted:

specific women’s journals in Iran, to selection published article in the field in Iran;
the center for information and documentation (IRANDOC), to selection of published theses in the field in Iran; and
in addition, based on the principle of access and to universalize and validate the issue, some of the published studies in specialized journals, women’s studies in the Emerald database and SAGE journals database investigated.
The most considerable studies of the abovementioned journals were reviewed.

For preliminary inclusion in this review, title, key words and abstract of articles were searched. All articles that were identified as relevant to present review and published in the period 2000 to 2014 were recovered accidentally. The initial search resulted in 78 articles. As Tranfield et al. (2003) suggested, articles were scanned for their fit with the specific topic of the literature review. Consequently, 23 articles were excluded from further analysis, the main reasons being:

some articles turned out to be practitioner-oriented and not relying on scientific research methods; and
even though they included some relevant key words in the title, abstract and key words, some articles were predominantly concerned with ICT and made no reference to women and ICT.
The remaining 55 articles were ultimately used to proceed with the second and third steps of the systematic literature review suggested by Tranfield et al. (2003) and form the basis for the results presented in the following sections.

Literature review and findings
Section:Previous sectionNext section
To facilitate the analyses of existing studies and findings, a general classification in four dimensions of World Index Gender Gap was considered, and related studies to each of these dimensions and their components were analyzed.

Political dimension: women’s empowerment
Most of the studies on gender gap in political dimension have tried to empower women. Abbott and Wallace (2001) believe the empowerment is a term that used to describe for smooth one’s own way or others try to achieve personal goal. Swift and Levin also indicate that empowerment include the state of mind development (feeling of strength, utility and merit) and change in structural conditions so that result in reallocation of power (Sarraf, 2006). According to Naghibi (2004), actual participation of women in politics will be achieved when public opinion accepts this participation and provides a healthy environment for their participation. Bukhart and Oulder (Unesco, 2005) also believe that success in economy based on ICT in societies is highly dependent on the participation of all people. Thus, both men and women should participate in it.

To avoiding waste of readers’ time, instead of pay attention to all studies in this field, I draw your attention to the most important studies carried in Table I and then these studies will be examined and analyzed in general.

Majority of studies in political dimension particularly have emphasized on women’s empowerment in different fields. Obviously, women’s empowerment means interning them in areas of decision-making which now is outside of these fields in most aspects. This will lead to real women’s character, increasing self-esteem, enhancing progressivity, increasing decision-making power in family and strengthening self-concept. The benefits of empowerment are more beneficial to entire community and growth of economic, social, political and cultural in communities. In addition, the use of new technologies will help to women’s empowerment. According to Hamlink (2004), technologies create new forms of communication that enable women to collapse their limited social status which women are often besieged and provide new opportunities for women’s employment in careers that require new skills. However, for these technologies, strong policies are required to make a positive impact on women’s life. The necessity to support women’s life in a society and to strengthen their empowerment and participation in new areas are clarified.

Economic dimension: the rate of participation and economic opportunities
Partnership gap.
Margaret Mead, American cultural anthropologist, states that women as their mission spend all their life to teaching and learning in field of human relations. Hence, they have special talent for cooperating and assisting in any given team work (Evans, 2001). In the past decades, women’s participation in economic, social and political activities and their concerned influence on their country’s development has been attracted the attention of many researchers, research centers and decision-making institutions. In this area, instead of enumerating all available studies, a list of these studies has been presented in Table II and then will be analyzed generally.

A simple analysis in this section is that if we have a systematic look toward society as an organism which condition of it survival is dynamics and participation of all its components to achieve evolution and a clear goal, women’s participation in a society along with men will seem essential for appearance of a complete community. An endorsement to the author’s view is the Geneva declaration in the international conference on information society which considered women as main beneficiaries in electronic government and a part of active and integral in current information society (Zahedi, 2005). Obviously, to achieve the goals of a society, gender equality must be considered in all aspects of development, and with technology assistance constructive participation of women, elimination of gender disparities in both family and society in developing economy is facilitated. A clear indication on how women can actively participate in a society is manifested in the prominent research by Isfandyari-Moghaddam et al. (2011) which illustrated that Iranian’s women along men has a role as well as more increasing participation in producing knowledge. Therefore, given the gender gap in all aspects of the global index, the strong and constructive engagement of women in other areas is worth pondering. Moreover, according to Fountain (2000), the current support for women as IT potential designers is seriously low. According to Fountain’s study, although women have made effective steps in many fields, their participation in engineering, mathematics and computer science has remained consistently low. Therefore, any effort to strengthen women’s participation in these disciplines is requires increasing the number of women in these fields of education.

Income gap.
Human Development Report of the United Nations Population Fund suggests that more than 70 per cent of the world’s poor are women. The gap between men and women in the cycle of poverty has increased in the past decade, leading to a phenomenon often referred to as the “feminization of poverty” (khakbazzadeh, 2008). Although the status of women in society in recent years has been improved and equal conditions without discrimination for social justice has been realized, the income gap in the labor market remains as one of the most important discrimination index against women. Privatizations of economy can impress the gender income gap by increasing competition because increasing of competition in market would lead to increased productivity and high salary and would decrease labor discrimination. In this regard, Taati (2010) presented impact of economic privatization policies on reducing the gender gap in the form of an econometric model. Table III represents concerned research on income gap.

This is inevitable that in today’s expensive world of technology, women’s participation along with men in economic and business issues can assist a lot in economic, social and cultural problems in a family. Women’s position in the community and acquiring the concerned knowledge of their surrounding by active participation would both solve family’s financial problems and enhance social and cultural development of societies. Findings of the abovementioned table indicate that today’s communities require substantial planning and designing major policies to get rid of gender income discrimination by dynamic of potential women’s capabilities in economic participation via economic privatization policies, changing in social attitudes toward women and the stereotyped thoughts ruling the system and eliminating feminine face of poverty.

Development gap
Managerial careers.
Glass theory is an issue which Roh-bakhsh (2006) in his research pointed out to assess gender discrimination. Based on this theory, women in organizational pyramid and in high levels meet to obstacles that called glass roof. He indicated that the most important factors in women’s lack of access to managerial positions are communicating, social and cultural factors such as family responsibilities, gender stereotypes, moral prejudice, gender attitudes, male’s friendly communication networks, artificial thinking about women and lack of belief on their capabilities. Burress and Zucca (2004) revealed that only 3 per cent of executive positions are led by women. Micheal Pastor concluded that women continue to consider themselves as lower-level careers in ICT. However, men have moved to higher wages and more responsibilities (Ahmadnia, 2004). According to study of Galyani Moghaddam on gender issues which worth reflecting, many recent studies particularly in developing countries are more on gender differences than gender gap (Galyani Moghaddam, 2010).

Sally E. Shaywitz (Professor at Yale University) believes that women for achieve to social status do not need to be like men. They just need to act beyond a woman. Gholipour et al. (2012) indicated that in Iran despite a dramatic increase in the number of women in academia, they still face major obstacles including faculty access and promotion as well as legal, cultural and family conditions. Dodd (2012) found that despite the high proportion role of women in organizational management, about half of them are employed in executive careers. Among of studies in Iran which study gender in management positions and the concerned obstacles are Fatemi-Sadr (2001), Haddadi (2003) and Hoseini-Lourgani (2006). Their findings include women’s low level of knowledge, cultural, social and religious factors, gender approach to management in society, and women’s family responsibilities. According to Tharenou et al. (1999) the most important facilitating factors in women’s advancement to managerial positions are their access to equal educational and developmental opportunities. They found that in present state of organizations, educational opportunities are more available for men. Like these results were found in studies by Burke and Mikkelsen (2005).

Technical and professional workforce.
It seems that gender gap in this part is deeper than economic dimension, and this may undoubtedly be due to limitations and problems that impede women’s entrepreneurship and creativity in community. Therefore, to find solutions to these problems which have some proposed solutions by various researchers, a general framework is need to be presented. (See Table IV). Study of Alsos et al. (2013) which has established a framework for the development of various approaches on gender and creativity is also recommended.

Review on the results of studies on development gap in managerial level revealed that several factors (as already mentioned) have effect on women’s inaccessibility to senior positions. It seems that most of these factors rooted in women’s lack of belief in taking such responsibilities. Women’s self-concept and the impact of wrong society’s attitude toward male-oriented managerial positions also would be affected on women in taking responsibility. As it is illustrated in Table IV, majority of the problems which exist for women on the way to professional workforce are related to obstacles in women’s entrepreneurship and creativity. The main proposed strategies to remove these barriers are harmony in work and family life as well as creating joint co-entrepreneurship roles and identities between men and women. Studies (Deacon et al., 2014) indicate that participatory role of any of the partners does not seem to be more valuable than another.

Education and health dimension
Education is one of the most important factors that have benefits not only for individuals, but also, for whole society (Moinifar, 2011). One of the benefits of women’s equal education for societies is economic development. Comparing countries’ data indicate that there is a positive meaningful relationship between gender equality in education and economic development (Ghobadi, 2005). Dollar and Gatti (1999) found that more women’s education leads to higher growth rates, and annual increases in income lead to a reduction in gender inequality. Abu-Ghaida and Kalsen (2002) provided empirical evidence which showed countries that have high gender gaps in education, are facing by declining per capita income of about 0.1 to 0.3. This decrease in the per capita income due to effect of gap in education, based on the above research, makes it more necessary to eliminate or reduce the gap.

In addition to the close relationship between women’s education and their income gap, lack of women’s education leads to inability in understanding their position in society, family, rights, needs and demands. This unawareness would lead to lack of women’s participation in society followed by a sense of inadequacy and inability in decision-making in family and society. Results on concerned problems will be affected more the community’s economic level than the social and cultural levels. Experiences show that if obstacles on women’s active participation in society are diminished, they would present their effective capabilities for the progress of societies. Women have taken effective steps in many fields so far particularly, in natural science (Fountain, 2000). Therefore, to keep pace with today’s information society, strengthening women’s awareness and capabilities and providing them with careers that require new skills is inevitable, skills that are the result of new ICT.

However, any attempt to strengthen the participation of women in the fields of technology and design is requires investment in education and designation of policies to increase the number of women in academic fields related to new ICT. Gender gap in health, according to report by the world health organization and related data to gender inequality that is annually released by the United Nations as human development reports are examined. Moradi Kale Lu (2009) believes that women in general have more life expectancy than men which results in their biologic conditions. He also acknowledged that women’s healthy life expectancy is even higher than men. However, as regards that one of the sub-branches of health dimension in the Global Gender Gap is the difference in life expectancy, it seems that women particularly in underdeveloped and the least developed countries do not have healthier life expectancy to proportion of their longevity, and it is due to gender inequality in these countries.

In addition to all the earlier mentioned studies in any particular aspect of gender gap, some studies also examined entire aspects including a notable research by Sadeghi-Fasayi and Kolhor (2007). He indicates that some of problems of women are related to pressures of development and some others which are avoidable are related to culture and ruling traditions of society. Other studies in this area that examined various aspects include Kalantari and Faghih-Imani (2013), Khani (2010) and Mehrabani (2012).

Conclusions and further research avenues
Section:Previous sectionNext section
Although in relation to majority of women in society (apart from women that have not a family) main task of a woman is effective her role in family. Obviously, her employment and full participation in society may cause a failure for her role. However, women’s public presence in today’s communities seems inevitable. Throughout history, many women along men and sometimes even better have had significant social responsibilities and their role as a housewife has remained consistent. Therefore, due to women’s inevitable presence and also effective their role in society something must be done and policies must be adopted.

In general, research literature shows that despite of many progresses made, gender gap still exists in all aspects. The smallest gender gap (21 per cent), which has eliminated, is related to women’s political empowerment. Empowerment means the level which women achieve to their individual progress that allows them to choose according on their demands. Therefore, try to achieve this level of individual progress for collective community advancement is requires to effort of managers, politicians and practitioners.

As it was illustrated, in connection with gap in economic dimension, women’s advancement in professional labor force has a deeper gap. There is no doubt that diminishing obstacles in innovation and entrepreneurship and developing policies to providing women’s participation in technical fields would have helped to reduce this divide. Moreover, one of the enabling factors is new ICT which have both good capabilities to women’s participation and are information producers to shape public’s views in constructing base on women’s empowerment in all aspects particularly political and economic. Libraries and other social organizations are suitable substrates to create a bold employment of women in ICT-related jobs, that it seems major of professionals to be women in these organizations. In this regard, to understand of women’s abilities in ICT-related jobs can be carried out research to assess their skills compared to men skills to determine whether women have talent and capabilities for these jobs? And if such capabilities exist in women, elimination of gender inequalities in this area should be on the agenda of politicians.

Review of literature on gender gap in this study illustrates that only one overseas theoretical and analytical study, (Fountain, 2000), is closely related to viewpoints of the present study that explore role of women in today’s information society and IT.

A review of these studies have shown that so far comprehensive research has not done on importance of women’s participation in ICT-related jobs. So, it seems that accuracy and review in findings of this study can be a warning to create the appropriate platform for active participation of women in these jobs. In addition, these findings are a written document to inform policymakers (in general) on need to promote and improve of women’s participation in this field.
