Gender Representations and Digital Media
Dorin Popaa
, Delia Gavriliub
*
a
Journalism & Communication Sciences, Faculty of Letters, "Al. I. Cuza", University, Iasi, Romania b
“Al.I Cuza University”, Iasi, Romania

Abstract
The construction of gender goes on today through various technologies of gender (e.g. cinema) and individual discourses (e.g.
theory) with the power to control the field of social meaning and thus produce, promote, and ‘implant’ representations of gender.
Digital media had and has even now an immense growing through the media consumption. The need to study ‘whose voices are
being heard in digital media’ passes from typically portrayed media (especially advertising and television) gender-specific items
– men with alcohol, vehicles, or business products, women associated with domestic products to the position of women as media
professionals or news actors. Our research tries to identify some of the new gender images in online media, by news content
analysis. Being aware of the impact of the news industries on our cultural, political, and social lives, we have chosen to focus our
study on how texts operate to produce meanings which reproduce dominant ideologies of gender in digital media news.
© 2015 The Authors.Published by Elsevier Ltd.
Peer-review under responsibility of The Association “Education for tomorrow” / [Asociatia “Educatiepentrumaine”].
Keywords: media gender, identity, online media, news.
1.Examine Gender and Media
In order to educate the public and to have an educated public, the news authors and the media representatives has
to have a holistic imagine of what discrimination is, what gender equality is, and further how they have to represent
the gender in media. Initially, a problem of consciousness, gender equality and gender representations in media, as a
general way of getting the information in our days, have become so important in the public sphere, that it is
* Corresponding author. Tel.: 0040722369654
E-mail address: dpopa@uaic.ro
© 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Peer-review under responsibility of The Association “Education for tomorrow” / [Asociatia “Educatie pentru maine”].
1200 Dorin Popa and Delia Gavriliu / Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 180 ( 2015 ) 1199 – 1206
necessary to point out some aspects regarding women, men and their public imagine. This public image
“transported” by the media content and significances to the readers, viewers, and listeners contribute to educate the
public in the sense of observing, trace some inequalities perpetuated by the media. In this direction goes our study,
trying to identify some of the roles given by media to men and to women, in order to establish how media should
react when speaking of gender equality and discrimination.
When asking what gender is, the answer should contain the difference between sex and gender. The sex, whether
male or female, is biologically determined. Gender is not biological but it refers to a socially constructed set of
behaviour patterns. Therefore, femininity and masculinity are culturally determined and matter of choice – they refer
to pattern of behaviour and qualities of behaviour that we normally associate with being female or being male.
Sex, whether male or female, is essentially a question of biology and genetic. Gender is the cultural and social
codes and conventions which are associated with either sex. One way to consider this aspect is to think in the
following terms: ‘Biology says ‘It's a Boy!’, and Gender says ‘We'll buy the blue outfits, the train sets and the
Action Men!’. The distinction between ‘Sex’ and ‘Gender’ has become increasingly important as feminist and
masculinist criticism have sought to question the orthodox and established conventional ways in which we are
brought up to think of 'Men' and Women', arguing that the ideas and associations which surround, say, femininity
are not issues of Biological determination, but rather of social and cultural convention. One might be born a woman
or a man, but that need not mean necessarily that one is therefore born to be either a housewife/homemaker or a
John Wayne/Clint Eastwood. Gender is perhaps the basic category we use for sorting human beings, and it is a key
issue when discussing representation. The concepts of gender – what does it mean to be a boy or a girl? – are
composed of elements of our own identity and the identities we assume other people to have.
Media seems to be a very important way of establishing these “identities”, to modify or even to define them.
Through his visibility, media makes us grow up with an awareness of what constitutes ‘appropriate’ characteristics
for objects and for humans. It is very easy to recognize that typically masculine means tough, hard, sweaty and
typically feminine suppose fragility, softness, fragrant.
1.1 Measuring Gender Representations in Media. Methodology
The way gender is represented in the media does have an influence on how we perceive gender roles. Certain
gender specific features can strengthen the image of what a man and a woman are, and how they should behave in
relation to each other. The analysis of women’s and men representations in media usually refers exclusively to news
reporting, headlines, radio or television news when it comes to prime-time newspapers (with a high impact / rating
of visualisations).
A wide range of different methods have been used in this field of study, however, the most common ones are
quantitative content analysis and discourse analysis (Carter & Steiner 2004, Collins 2011,Gauntlett 2008, Rudy et al
2010). If the women’s stance in politics and advertising is well represented in national and international welldocumented
studies (even doctoral dissertations), it’s difficult to analyze the digital environment because of its
fickle character and of the changes that may rapidly incur, but mostly because of the speed with which news comes
and goes. The temporary aspect of the digital content makes difficult for us to establish, classify the image of the
woman in neat and distinct categories. We have a rather different image depending on the topic discussed in the
article - social, political, economic, lifestyle, home care.
Others researches concerning gender and media are quite extensive and cover many different forms of media, for
example: prime-time television, movies, cartoons/Disney, music, games and much more recently the internet where
new forms of media are being produced. Quite a lot of research has been carried out concerning media's
representation of female politicians, but most of the research is from the US, Western Europe and the Nordic
countries.
The methodology of our study takes into account the digital media which gives us a round image, completing the
other studies made on traditional media. Such an overview outlines if another aspects, such as the perpetuation of
the stereotypes or a broking line, giving maybe more credit to women, or making them more active, can change the
gender representations. It is already well known the fact that the Internet has changed the readers’ habits to lecture
newspapers; therefore we will notice some approach differences at the level of the discourse too. Media educates,
guides, manipulates. The more we are aware of its strength, the better we can protect and be less manipulated. 
 Dorin Popa and Delia Gavriliu / Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 180 ( 2015 ) 1199 – 1206 1201
More specifically, the methodology approached in the present study is limited to the identification and
interpretation of the meaning indicated by a series of headlines of some general articles, on subjects of general
interest published between July-August 2014 on Romanian news portals. We name here www.gandul.info,
www.prosport.ro, www.romaniatv.ro, www.cotidianul.ro, www.jurnalul.ro, www.hotnews.ro.
Therefore, if aware of the gender differences, they can be integrated into our way of life not only through
education, culture, but also through media. We cannot hope to have parity when representing genders in media, as
this parity isn’t to be found in other fields, but knowing how these gender differences are identified and transmitted
this would mean a better placement of genders in the context.
The way media reflects the constitutive elements of the society, the human experiences, actions, opinions, daily
concerns can be analyzed by a number of indicators, such as: (a) the percentage of women and men evoked (in our
case, also seen or heard for television or radio) in a randomly selected sample content (for one week, for example),
(b) the percentage of women and men quoted as source of information or/and opinion in topical articles, (c) the
percentage of women and men considered speaking persons, professionals or common citizens, (d) the percentage of
women and men evoked, interviewed or quoted as source of information on different subjects: politics, economics
and business, war and conflict, science and technology, sports or other fields, (e) the percentage of time, space and
importance given to information which evoked women as source of information /opinions or dedicated to women or
subjects for women (The Report of the United Nations Organisation on Education, 2012).
1.2. Women versus Men in the Studies
The rapid changes of the phenomena involved in the gender studies determined a constant adaptation of the way
the journalistic text answered when it had to adapt its resources. The changes interposed in the relationships woman
– man (gender relations), the technological transformation in the media field, the content, the patronage and the
control of the media, as well as the globalization generate evolutions in the theories concerning the gender
representations. The way media builds the pictures of masculinity and femininity, as well as their relationship could
be an important issue in our study, but the constraints related to the means required for such monitoring allow us
only an outline of a short freeze-frame on the journalistic text which presents the genders by their titles. For this task
we will use a relatively new theoretical background related to the study of genders in media and the identification of
some expressions used in Romanian online news for genders.
The idea of feminism became quite common, and the year 2000 brought for the gender literature in Romania an
unprecedented development. Nowadays, no war of sexes foresee, but in everything we do we find gender differences
as natural (Greer, G. 1999). motivates that the present popular culture is significantly less feminist than it was 30
years ago. David Gauntlett (Gauntlett, 2002) states that: “the traditional view of a woman as a housewife or low
status worker has been kick-boxed out of the picture by the feisty, successful ‘girl power’ icons” (Gauntlett, 2002:
247).
The figure of the slim woman as a symbol (physically but not only), the fact that the older women are sent away
from the media (except for the advertisings which have as target market this age group), the shows where the nudity
appears as normal (became as common sense), all these facts appear as something normal. To this paradox and
complex image, another aspect is added: as well as media, the relationships between genders and feminist ideas
change. There is no stable or fixed perspective to be applied in all times and geographic areas. And thus, we speak of
stereotypes, images well ingrained in the collective mentality whereof everyone could tell you a thing or two, more
or less real, but at least at the level of perception they are identically shaped, following the same path: the compliant
woman, taking care of the housemaking and of the child’s fever, the well dressed man, present in a higher position or
representing images of physical and psychical force (Women’s Media Center Report, 2014).
The world we are building from representations is divided in gender, race, ethnic, class, age, disability, sex or
origin area, where advantages, disadvantages, exclusions are mostly associated with these categories. But this world
is equally saturated by media, information and communication technologies. Starting from the idea that the analysis
of feminism in media was vivified by the wish to understand the way the images and cultural constructions refer to
inequality, oppression and domination, we have found different work perspectives: examination of images, text, 
1202 Dorin Popa and Delia Gavriliu / Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 180 ( 2015 ) 1199 – 1206
various methodologies of observing the gender differences in media, distinct ways of understanding how media put
into relation concepts of subjectivity and gender identity to create the image.
Media should be an active partner in promoting equality between sexes. An elimination of stereotypes would be
possible in time, though this situation is at present a desideratum and it can’t be fully accomplished nor performed in
all geographic areas. In fact, an important step would be the awareness when producing news (here including media
production) the issue of gender differences may lead to a reduction of gender disparities. Codes of conduct were
suggested, codes foreseeing a compulsory respect of the principle of equality between women and men. As example
we can mention a code from Luxembourg which promoted in the public services the avoidance of discrimination for
any reason in the governmental companies (Portail de l’égalité entre femmes et hommes, 2014). Theoretically, this
type of document is issued in several governmental agencies, but in order to apply them, there is a lack of means and
instruments.
1.3. Online Identity
Internet identity or Internet persona is in fact the social identity which a user establishes in online communities
and on websites. It can be considered (according to Wikipedia) a presentation of a person built-up actively and
continuously. There are people who appear in the digital environment under their real identity (using real names,
real personal data such as their city, work place, and studies, hobbies, read books, etc.) or there are people who
prefer an anonymous presentation, identifying themselves with a false name and who give false information about
their life, age, preoccupations. This type of identity can even be built differently depending on the social group with
which they relate. In this case, the models of education that should be given to beginners in the digital environment
must include this aspect which isn’t to be neglected. This led to the first or among the first, “online check” agencies,
agency used primarily by employers who did not trust online profiles, using the services of an agency specialized in
tracking and establishing the real identity of some potential employees: studies, previous jobs, responsibilities,
exchanges on social networks, even hobbies. Thus, we can easily see that this online representation has become
extremely important. Media takes part in the creation of these ‘characters’, influencing the image of men and
women in popular culture.
The emergence of the concept of digital identity has generated many questions in the academic world. Social
networking services and online avatars have made the notion of identity far more complex. The academic world has
responded to these emerging trends with the development of domains of scholarly research such as
technoself studies, which focuses on all aspects of human identity in technological societies.
Under these conditions, we come to the concept of ‘masking identity’, every surfer having the possibility to mask
his identity, even hiding his gender. We find this situation in digital media when watching the comments on different
topics, most often we find false names, addresses, exactly to diminish the responsibility of the ideas presented in the
comment.
Wiszniewski and Coyne state “Education can be seen as the change process by which identity is realized, how
one finds one's place. Education implicates the transformation of identity. Education, among other things, is a
process of building up a sense of identity, generalized as a process of edification”. People interacting in a
digital community must reveal something about themselves and have others respond to this contribution. In this
manner, the mask is constantly being formulated in dialogue with others and thereby people will gain a richer and
deeper sense of who they are. There will be a process of edification that will help everybody come to understand
their strengths and weaknesses (Wiszniewski, Coyne, 2002).
2. Popular Culture and Digital Media
In many ways, popular culture can be the news snapshot (title, picture, text, author) or Facebook photo page
that documents our lives in the social world; it is a backdrop of day-to-day life. Media content through his agenda
setting function is a drop of our lives. And their power is both diffuse and indisputable. From Disney to Barbie to
MySpace, from local to international news websites, everyone having access to the internet navigate daily on
Internet for different reasons. By interacting with a vast amount of media—books, toys, video games, 
 Dorin Popa and Delia Gavriliu / Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 180 ( 2015 ) 1199 – 1206 1203
advertisements, etc.- requires us to become aware of and fluent with the diverse popular cultural materials people
read, view, and consume (Marshall, Sensoy, 2014).
What exactly is popular culture? Actually a permanent definition is not a valid proposition because ‘Popular
culture’ is a challenging term to define: culture is constantly changing and renders what was once popular soon to be
outdated and perhaps quaint. Popular culture has a variety of expressions: can describe texts like Michael
Jackson’s Thriller album, it can refer to things that are less sophisticated or considered ‘low’ culture (for instance,
popular series books), popular culture is often synonymous with a consumer culture that is produced for mass
consumption (Disney’s animated films; McDonald’s Happy Meal toys). And the media popular culture might also
be defined as a place for creating new forms of expression as well as a vehicle for critique. In particular, media
offers a space where new meanings are made through tactics such as culture jamming.
The media culture has become more rough and populist. These tendencies are generally disadvantageous for
women. It is also undeniable that the media shapes our conceptions of what it means to be male or female. We
encounter many different male and female role models. Following the table below, we can see some ways of
describing man or women when taking into account their activities.
Table 1.How might the following actions be 'gendered' through online media, given that both sexes can do these actions?
Action described in online media article Feminine Masculine
Drive a car x x
Swim x x
Eat healthy/ make sport
Cook
Watch movies
Shop
Work
Play games
Use watches
Fly with an airplane
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
In order to see how these representations can make a false image of what a men or a woman can do in their life,
we’ve tried to identify actions which are very well presented in media like men’s actions or women’s actions, but, in
real life, these activities can be ‘interpreted’ by both. We just identified in brief view over the online general
media/press.
Amanda Simmons (2013) brings in the foreground a chart, as seen below, searching thus reference points in the
gender theories on which to build patterns associated with the texts of online news (Simmons, 2013). From
traditional ideologies – which mean that men have held power in our society, and women being related to the
specific domestic situations, such as housewives, mothers or a sexual objectification, found in advertising and
magazines to stereotypes it was only one step to take. “The stereotypes we are offered create a false sense of
ourselves, who we are and how we should live – false consciousness” (Simmons, 2013). From the 1960s onwards,
women seek to gain equality. They gained opportunities, and legislation having now the chance (not all the women,
but those that try) to step into what had once been men’s shoes. In modern representations, femininity has also
become associated with a stronger, independent and confident woman. Women are less passive, and they have key
roles.
Table 2
Femininity and Masculinity - labels
Competitive – male or female? Domesticated – women?
1204 Dorin Popa and Delia Gavriliu / Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 180 ( 2015 ) 1199 – 1206
Rational – men Independent – male or female?
Ruthless - male or female?!
Aggressive - male or female?
Professional - male or female?
Weak –women
Strong – men
Sportive- women
Sensitive - women
Passive - women
Emotional - women
3. What Can Titles Tell us About the Role and Status of Women/Men in Online Romanian Media News
With the Internet increasingly serving as a forum for public debate, social interaction, and commerce, new webbased
arenas have also opened up for the spread of hate speech, sexualized harassment and human trafficking. This
development has offered new challenges to researchers, politicians and law-enforcement agencies.
Media have their own capacity of empowering this public and open space of debate. Thus, as the space became
more open, the more these gender differences could be uttered and highlighted through comments, language, video
posts, photos or quotes which broaden in the virtual media the means to express feelings- not always positive, in
reference to gender identities or inequalities. “From a global perspective, it seems that things are getting worse, both
in mainstream media and, particularly, on the internet. Newspapers such as the English Daily Mail have become
more extreme lately. The media are constantly competing to gain people's attention and in order to make money they
commercialise and popularize”, says the professor (Bergstrøm, 2013). We have tried to extract from some examples
of titles concerning women or men representation in online Romanian news the imagine that can be transferred to
the public by some titles in online news. This not a quantitative research, because our goal was not to have a numeric
imagine of the gender representation, but to identify how a men or a women is presented and represented by his
actions through media headlines. In order to identify some of these representations, we have outline in here 6
representative titles. We have chosen alternative gender representations, trying to bring into attention titles involving
men’s actions, women’s actions and common actions. It is well known that a single title cannot give us a hole
imagine of the gender representation, but for us is important to see if these titles reinforce stereotypes or try to fight
stereotypes. We have chosen these titles in order to involve gender representations: men, women and their relation.
(a) Ciolos : Romania will be represented with Corina Cretu holding the regional development commissioner's
portfolio (www.cotdianul.ro)
(b) Rovana Plumb (PSD): At EU level, Romania is as an example for integrating young people in the labour
market (www.jurnalul.ro)
(c) They paid 100.00 Euros for an apartment but the developer entered into insolvency proceedings before
finishing the apartment house. What is the sponsor’s answer given to the injured after four years.
(gandul.info)
(d) Teachers will receive 150 Euros for professional development (hotnews.ro)
(e) A man involved in an illegal hunting found shot in the chest. Police is looking for his friend wherewith the
man went hunting. (gandul.info)
(f) Goal: Rio. Simona Halep aims for Olympic medal for Romania, but she is aware that it will be difficult:
‘Bringing a medal for Romania in the Olympics is more than I do’ (prosport.ro).
Corina Cretu is a Romanian politician woman, known for her very focused on profession life. Taking into
account the Romanian social and political context, it’s easy to draw a conclusion on how the two genders are
presented: the future elections impose an agenda for public messages, and there are both present, images of men and
women, as presidential candidates. We have noticed in the headlines proposed both categories. The name of the
campaigner and the name of the woman, who now has a commission of high degree at international level, obviously
a criticized woman at this time when she has been appointed in this position, a former politician who evinced
discretion and professionalism. Along with the nomination, this position requires lots of responsibilities, but also
gainings, the debates on her preparation became antagonistic (her physical appearance did not help her to achieve 
 Dorin Popa and Delia Gavriliu / Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 180 ( 2015 ) 1199 – 1206 1205
this position, Corina Cretu didn’t put more emphasis on her public image), the public opinion being misled. Having
little personal control of the individual and professional Corina Cretu, it’s obvious that the talk shows on TV,
especially the news websites, highlighted the fact that we still live in a segregated society.
On the other hand, a continuous suspicion hanging over the media control renders difficult the attempt to
establish concretely the manner used for media to convey identities and gender stereotypes. For example, the second
headline brings into focus Rovana Plumb. She makes a positive statement, very important for her activity as she
rules the Ministry of Labour. As our intention isn’t to engage in political polemics, we shall stop to the interpretation
conveyed by such headline: a woman at the top of an important political structure (Ministry of Labour), a woman
who has a political affiliation and who is part of a special category, namely the female politicians being differently
represented than an ordinary woman. It’s the image of a strong woman, which makes a positive declaration, waited
for by the Romanian voters and acclaimed by the party colleagues. Here is a slight discrepancy image known as
stereotypical of women in the media. The discrepancy comes from our different categorization of Rovana Plumb in
female politician in power, so in full professional practice.
The fields suggested in the headlines are easily identifiable: politics (a), politics (b), economics (c), education (d),
social (e), sports (f). According to these fields, the image captures the following two types: a man offers an opinion
on Corina Cretu’s abilities to be in this position (former professional in domestic and foreign policy), a female
politician makes a statement about the results of his work and the structure which she leads. The third news brings to
the fore an economic issue; the headline does not say much, but the content of the article came into our notice, there
are listed as victims of the economic crisis and real estate - only women. It's true that it's about celebrities, names
that call the readers’ attention, but they are female celebrities and then it could mislead the reader suggesting that
only women can be naïve, as it was an advance for an apartment house to be built and let uncompleted.
The social news concerns both men and women, it is a neutral headline, knowing that only the minister of
Education is a man. In fact, his name appears in the first sentence of the article following a quite long statement. The
next two headlines focus on masculine gender (e) and after that the feminine gender (f-Simona Halep). The first
headline tells an unhappy story, its context being a typical masculine context (hunting with friends), the second is a
statement of Simona Halep, the Romanian tennis player who lately had successful results. For the latter news, the
fields seem reversed: the social news usually presents women (as caregiver, victim, careful mother, old age support),
and sports news men features. In fact, I have intentionally searched for such representations, concluding that the
exception strengthens the rule. By the 80 headlines viewed, most kept the stereotypes already known and which we
have mentioned (certainly not exhaustively) above. The exceptions (searched and highlighted through these
headlines) strengthen our believes that media inoculates and maintains the gender differences, all the more so during
the Internet era, when everyone is free to express himself by taking a false name and the control of the messages is
randomly performed.
4. Conclusions
The subject of how infrastructures and technology relate to gender studies is a question that remains to be raised
in the research area, but also in the sociological, civil and political arena. The possibility of making ICT available to
all citizens, regardless of gender, disability, etc. is another topic of research and debate.
The more people are free to express themselves, and the digital environment offers this possibility the more we
would expect for these differences to be appeased/not deleted, diminished through media. As we can notice the
evolution of this phenomenon in other regions isn’t exactly a positive one, thus signals could be for us a sort of
guide, a long-term vision. Internationally, there are several organizations which fight to sustain the feminine cause
(Fight for Women’s Voice, National Organization for Women, Equality now, National Women’s Studies
Association, The European Association for Gender Research, Education and Documentation, Nordic Information on
Gender, Institute on Gender Equality and Women’s History, etc) so as to become open and balanced societies, but
the engine of the society merges all these standpoints and changes their meaning according to the cultural, economic
and general political background. 
1206 Dorin Popa and Delia Gavriliu / Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 180 ( 2015 ) 1199 – 1206
The results of our little focus on online headlines from online general media news are trying to outline that new
media don’t work like traditional media. The free access to the Internet and the liberty of writing any comments you
want to write, force online news makers to be pay more attention to the way of representing gender, and moderate
such discussions. Starting with the manner of making a news, the picture attached, and continuing with the title and
the discourse strategies used, anyone who make news or deliver content in a free way (like in Romania) to the
public, must be careful to the misunderstood right of everybody to spread any words they like even if it can violate
someone’s right to dignity, to image. The new Internet age can change the communication paradigm, the freedom of
speech must be in other ways controlled, and the news makers and the public must be aware of their rights and their
limits in presenting and responding to public information. Even if the major changes are not visible, the new media
must be more careful to the way of treating the gender problem and the way the news transmit information to the
young public or even to the specifics publics like women, children, gypsies, no matter their occupation or they jobs.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the strategic grant POSDRU/159/1.5/S/133652, co-financed by the European Social
Funds within the Sectorial Operational Program Human Resources Development 2007 – 2013.

References
Bergstrøm I. I. (05.12.2013). Media Images 
