Women's Studies International Forum
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/wsif
Mutable technology, immutable gender: Qualifying the “co-construction of
gender and technology” approach
Adriana Gil-Juáreza
, Joel Feliub,⁎
, Anna Vitoresb,1
aDepartament de Psicologia, Universitat Rovira i Virgili, Campus Sescelades, Edifici W0, 43007 Tarragona, Catalonia, Spain bDepartament de Psicologia Social, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Campus UAB, Edifici B, 08193 Cerdanyola del Vallès, Catalonia, Spain
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:
Gender
Technology
Co-construction
Performativity
Gender trouble
Interpretative flexibility
ABSTRACT
In highly technical societies, gender is largely produced in relation to technology. In this article, we explore the
effects on the construction of gender and technology when groups of parents discuss technological activities. To
do so, we report the results of a research project conducted in Barcelona, in which fathers and mothers, after
playing video games with their sons and daughters, expressed their opinions about that activity, the relations
their sons and daughters have with video games, and their own relationship with technology. The results support
the idea that gender and technology are discursively and practically in permanent co-construction and have a
relatively firm relationship that guarantees stability to both. However, we find that when people are confronted
with facts that contradict the dominant perception that women are technologically unskilled or uninterested, it is
only technology and not gender that is flexibly interpreted.
Introduction
In the fifth episode of the third season of The Big Bang Theory, in
searching for topics of conversation, the aerospace engineer Howard
Wolowitz asks Bernadette Rostenkowski, his new friend who is finishing
a doctorate in microbiology: “And computers? Do you like computers?”
to which she responds: “I use them, but I don't like them” (Lorre,
Prady, & Cendrowski, 2009). For some women, computers are something
tedious to which they can only show their indifference (Anderson,
Lankshear, Timms, & Courtney, 2008; Kelan, 2007; Rommes, Overbeek,
Scholte, Engels, & De Kemp, 2007). Nonetheless, Laia, a participant in
our research, maintains that computing jobs are not technical jobs but
creative. These are jobs where, in her own words, “you use language to
create something”. Laia was a unique participant; she appeared to be
the only woman in a technological company with 120 employees.
However, instead of seeing herself as less feminine, she has opted to
redefine computing itself to make it a profession involving a stereotypical
‘feminine quality’: language. In this move technology — but not
gender — is flexibly interpreted.
Within the field of psychology, which is the authors' field, the
problematic relationship between gender and technology has scarcely
been attended to (for recent exceptions on digital family or social networking
sites, see Gordo Lopez, Contreras, & Cassidy, 2015; Dobson,
2014a, 2014b). However, in recent decades, an entire field has emerged
with an abundant output highlighting the socially constructed nature of
technology and its relation to the construction of gendered subjectivities.
Perspectives such as that of social studies of technology
(Bijker & Law, 1992; Pinch & Bijker, 1984), by describing the role and
meaning of technologies in our societies, encourage us to abandon the
idea that these are neutral constructs that determine our lives with
straight effects. The social construction of technologies refers to a
complex assemblage of social relations and processes, which include
gender, that not only affect their design, development and implementation,
but that make up their meaning, usability and efficiency.
As some authors have indicated (Oudshoorn & Pinch, 2003; Pinch &
Bijker, 1984, 1986), technology may be interpretatively flexible: as
users also play a part in defining technology, different groups may
endow it with completely different meanings. For instance, Cockburn
and Ormrod (1993) showed how the microwave was shaped in a gendered
way, as different gender roles were projected onto it before,
during and after its design (cited in Lagesen, 2012). From a constructivist
view, technology is created in social relationships, carrying
social meanings and expressing social norms, and so too is gender.
Therefore, it is not only the machines that get gendered, but also and
especially their users. As Lagesen argues ‘The most prominent theoretical
approach in feminist studies of technology has been the idea that
gender and technology are co-constructed’ (Lagesen, 2012, p.443). As
Landstrom put it “gender [should not be thought of] as an identity trait
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wsif.2017.11.014
Received 29 October 2016; Received in revised form 15 November 2017; Accepted 28 November 2017
⁎ Corresponding author.
1 Present address: Independent Researcher.
E-mail addresses: adriana.gil@urv.cat (A. Gil-Juárez), joel.feliu@uab.cat (J. Feliu).
Women's Studies International Forum 66 (2018) 56–62
Available online 07 December 2017
0277-5395/ © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
T
that comes from within the individual and determines their relationships
with others, but as something emerging in the processes in which
people and technology are enmeshed.” (2007, p. 10). However, ‘gender
is generally treated as a stable, pre-given category that shapes the
technology under scrutiny. It is black-boxed, “the content and behaviour
of gender relations is assumed to be common knowledge, and
their meanings are stabilized and no longer need to be considered”
(Ormrod, 1994: 32)’ (Lagesen, 2012, p. 444). It would appear, then, to
be fruitful to look at how gender itself is constructed around specific
technological settings.
As Judith Butler (1988, 1990) stated, gender is a performative effect
made up of certain ways of doing and saying that persist. Furthermore,
it is a contingent effect that must be iterated in order to survive. As
Pujal and Amigot detailed, identification practices, which imply specific
performances, are not only gestures, postures and appearances, but
they also entail the intervention of language and discourses about the
self: ‘This is what [Butler] calls repeated linguistic interpellation which
produces a self-recognition and a self-difference in the subject in terms
of identification-disidentification’ (2010, p. 143). These performative
effects are produced within a ‘heterosexual matrix’—a linguistically
constructed worldview that reproduces itself by claiming gendered
subjects as already having an implied desire for each other (Butler,
1990), a ‘grid of cultural intelligibility through which bodies, genders,
and desires are naturalized’ (Butler, 1990: 194). Performativity ‘is
linked not only to the formation of the subject but also to the production
of the matter of bodies’ (Barad, 2003, cited in Morison & Macleod,
2013). Thus, it can be argued that, as language is always language in a
context, we should explore how it works to position participants in
relation to technological discourses and with what effects in scenarios
where identity claims are made around the use of technology.
One interesting specific scenario may be video gaming practices, as
it is a familiar technological space where gendered practices around
technology can be easily observed and discussed by its participants. The
use of video games is extremely differentiated between boys and girls,
both in terms of time dedicated to them and appreciation for them (GilJuárez,
Feliu, & Vitores, 2010; Greenberg, Sherry, Lachlan, Lucas, &
Holmstrom, 2010; Winn & Heeter, 2009). Unfortunately, as Hayes
(2008) discussed, the appreciation and command of video games is an
important factor in encouraging interest in information technology
expertise. The gender divide in the use of video games has been related
on several occasions to a decrease in opportunities for women (GilJuárez,
Vitores, Feliu, & Vall-llovera, 2011; Hayes, 2008; Jenson & de
Castell, 2005). However, approaching the subject as differences between
boys and girls in the use of a particular machine, takes two givens
as an explanation: technology and gender. This means that some
characteristics of video games would then clash with some essential
characteristics of women and vice versa. A considerable problem in
tackling the digital divide in this way is that it assumes as a starting
point that gender and technology have fixed qualities independent of
the very situations in which actors are involved and independent of the
meanings that actors give to these situations — that is, outside the
particular relationships between users and technologies, and outside
the accounts that users give of their own use, and that of people around
them. In this article, we aim to show how both technology and gender
meanings are not givens, but rather, they are negotiated in the course of
discussions around its users (Faulkner, 2001; Wajcman, 2010). To do so
we analysed the accounts of a group of fathers and mothers on the uses
of and interests in video games by their daughters and sons, as well as
their own relationship with these games and with new technologies.
The main goal of the research we undertook was to analyse the
discourses that construct gender and technology when people discuss
video gaming in order to describe how both become obvious and unquestionable.
We did find that reification happened, however not in a
symmetrical way, since when common understandings of gender and
technology conflicted during the discussion, technology's meaning became
more flexible, thus guaranteeing that gender remained unchanged
and could continue to appear essential and static.
Method: video gaming and talking about it
Parents gender their children, as Kane found in her research: “[For
sons], most parents made efforts to accomplish, and either endorsed or
felt accountable to, an ideal of masculinity” (Kane, 2006, p. 173). To be
able to analyse how gender and technology are created and stabilised in
parents' talk, and to provide a relevant context for discourse on gender
and technology to emerge meaningfully – i.e. not in abstract talk but in
talk about specific practices around technology – we organised 6 video
game workshops for mothers and fathers, their sons and daughters in
Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain. The workshops took place between April
and November 2010. They were planned and developed with the collaboration
of a company specialising in the design and implementation
of educational and leisure projects: MARINVA. The workshops were one
hour long, during which mothers and fathers with their sons and
daughters could simultaneously play four games for 15 min each.
Games were selected following the criteria that they should be diverse
in their gendered common associations and in the ways they were to be
played2
.
These workshops took place in different schools and community
centres in the city providing us with a diverse sample from different
economic, cultural and educational backgrounds. The distribution of
Barcelona inhabitants is correlated with household income distribution
(Barcelona City Council, 2012). The workshops and the discussion
groups, ordered from the lowest to the highest household income were
located in: La Teixonera, Horta, Sant Antoni, Sagrada Família and Sant
Gervasi3
.
In total, 37 mothers and fathers with a son or a daughter aged between
8 and 14 years of age attended the workshops answering a call
for volunteers in a study of video games. The call was made through the
usual local practices of each school or community centre, normally a
flyer given by the staff to the children or a notice posted on the news
board. After an introduction in which we explained that volunteers
would participate in research on the use of video games, we explained
the consent form given to them and asked them to fill it out. We provided
information on: (a) research; (b) contact details for the research
team; (c) how the data would be used (conditions and guarantees for
storage, archiving, exchange and safe use of data); and (d) commitment
to ethical management of these (confidentiality and anonymity).
During the time they played, we made observations and took field
notes for every couple (mother/father with his/her daughter/son)
participating in each workshop and for each of the games. Their time
playing the game was videotaped too. Although we acknowledge that
these observations possibly oriented our current analysis, these data are
not the subject of this article and are not explicitly handled here.
When they finished playing, the adults and children were separated
into two discrete discussion groups (6 children groups and 6 adult
2 The selection criteria for the games were:
• That their recommended ages were between 8 and 14 years
• That 2 players could play them simultaneously (a mother or father and daughter or
son)
• That they could be played in 10–15 min
• That they implied a variety of accessories
• That both games of competition and cooperation were included.
4 games were selected according to these criteria:
• 1 PC game of simulation and cooperation (Spore. Creature creator)
• 1 Console game created to play in a cooperative group or family (Super Mario
Galaxy for Nintendo Wii)
• 1 Console game with traditional gamepads for sports competition (Shaun White
Snowboarding PlayStation)
• 1 Console game with an alternative accessory like dance pad (Dance Factory for
PlayStation). 3 Assuming a figure of 100 for Barcelona global household income index: La Teixonera
has 71.3, Horta 80, Sant Antoni 94.8, Sagrada Família 95.3 and Sant Gervasi 187.9
(Barcelona City Council, 2012).
A. Gil-Juárez et al. Women's Studies International Forum 66 (2018) 56–62
57
groups, that is 12 discussion groups in 6 different sessions). We believe
this arrangement produced very specific discussions, not based on the
proposal of hypothetical situations but rather tied specifically to the
experience that fathers, mothers, sons and daughters had just had. The
discussion groups were transcribed so as not to hinder the actual flow of
the conversation, employing usual punctuation conventions so that the
content would be easy to read later on. The data (video sessions, field
notes, audio records and their transcriptions) have been stored safely
with access restricted to the research team.
In this article, we present and discuss only the results for the groups
made up of adults4
. In total, the participants comprised 37 adults (26
women and 11 men), each group comprising between 5 and 8 adults.
We began the discussion by asking which game they liked best of the
games they had just played, if they liked playing with their children and
if they did it at home. The discussion continued with talk of video game
tastes, their personal experiences with them and regulating their child's
play. Then we introduced the question of imagining their children
working in that field and asked them for their practices with technology
at home (who did what).
For the analysis, we considered it appropriate to follow some suggestions
brought forward by Morison and Macleod's (2013) performative-performance
analytical approach: to look for the common elements
across discussion groups in terms of discursive resources and also to pay
attention to trouble and the process of repair. To understand the
identity work accomplished in an interview, attention must be payed to
trouble and the process of repair. Trouble can be understood as the
“difficulties with regard to the onus to remain consistent in narration”
(Morison & Macleod, 2013, p. 571). Repair can be done in the form of
correcting a previous position in order to avoid criticism, but also, in
Butlerian terms, to maintain the illusion of gender as anchored to the
sexed body. In every group, ideas on gender differences developed relatively
soon, usually when discussing tastes and developed in the
discussion about future imagined jobs for the children. In trying to
account for the apparent sex differences in the behaviour and the
feelings that emerged during the workshop and its subsequent discussion,
participants consolidated the gender binary in many ways. The
final codes could be organised into three categories: “segregated
worlds”, “different domestic responsibilities” (which included gaming
with children), and “disaffection from technology”. In short, binary
gender was reified through the description of two segregated worlds,
apparently caused by children's individual tastes; through adults taking
differentiated domestic responsibilities, specifically by fathers playing
with boys' games (but not with girls' games) and being the common
solvers of technological issues and by mothers not doing so even when
they had the ability to engage with technological activities; and through
mothers not having time to play and feeling hopeless about technology.
Although the different discussion groups were relatively consensual on
every one of those aspects, trouble occurred in Laia's group, the only
woman participant having a technological job. In this case, technology
was flexibly interpreted to avoid contradicting the gender binary.
Results
First, we present the three categories just mentioned organised
around two major subjects: gaming in itself, as a gendered practice, and
home, as the space where gendering takes place. After that, we will
focus on Laia's group's particular interaction.
Accounting for gender in gaming
In the words of adult participants, the existence of the gender binary
was reaffirmed by using the metaphor of men and women inhabiting
two different worlds. As Carles stated: ‘…the worlds of boys and girls are
very different…5
.’ Two worlds whose differences can be observed as they
live up to customary stereotypes: a peaceful girls' world compared to an
active and violent boys' world:
…I have two girls and the games have to be calm, I mean, give them
games of… a game in which you kill people and… and they're not,
they're not interested, and on the contrary when my nephews come and
see the games my daughters… […] they're not interested at all, there are
no deaths, of course… it's that… Am I right or not? Yes, the worlds of
boys and girls are very different.
This two world view paralleled a common practice: the mothers
from our discussion groups made clear that they hardly ever played
video games with their children, mainly providing the explanation that
they had domestic responsibilities to look after. As Elisabet stated: ‘…
but it's different with the father, because with the mother it's like… ok,
they're playing, so I'll do some things, it's like… ok, they're busy, I can do
things that need to be done’. Most fathers, unlike most mothers in the
groups, told us that they played video games. In fact, fathers considered
it ‘quality time’ that they shared with their children. Maybe not surprisingly
some fathers made clear they were very actively involved in
their sons' games, but that this did not occur so clearly when it concerned
their daughters' games: ‘I never play with them’ said Xavier. But
mothers did not play with their daughters either. Therefore, for girls,
playing video games had easily become an activity that adults did not
share with them, sending them the message that grown-up women do
not play.
In electronic play, as with traditional play, genders are practised,
tastes and interests are tried out and preferences are established that
usually coincide with the cultural mandates of gender (Jenson & de
Castell, 2011; Walkerdine, 2006). Unsurprisingly, the absence of technologies
in the girl's world looked correct and even desirable:
but for example, it is interesting too when my daughter's friends come,
normally they don't play that, but maybe it's because she is a girl, right?
Maybe it's more a boy thing, right? Playing video games, but the girls
play, really, like all kids should, they play…they put on dresses, or they
play theatre, I don't know, things like that (Thomas).
When girls play ‘like all kids should’, they are normatively constructed
as appropriate to what is expected of a healthy childhood.
Remarkably, in this except only girls corresponded to this nostalgic
construction of a good childhood, the a-technological childhood. The
‘good girl’ trope (quiet, peaceful, caring) (Walkerdine, 2006) was thus
re-enacted within the technological practices discourse.
Sex differences in play and in the feelings involved in play were
usually organised around statements about children's personal preferences.
These were considered personal options about which parents
should not have an opinion, for individual tastes were something to be
respected. These personal preferences were not seen as provisional
during the discussion, but established as hard stable facts; they were put
forward as interests that last over time and were uninterrupted, continuing
into adulthood. For instance, Susanna said that she has always
considered herself hopeless with computers, clearly to indicate a stable
disposition. In fact, when Susanna commented on the only game she
liked, she recreated an emotional world that was very negatively
4 Unfortunately, although children's views should also be taken into account, discussions
in children's groups were not as rich as in parents’. They explained their practices
and affections rather succinctly, and did not really engage in the discussions as parents
did, therefore making reliable interpretations practically impossible.
5 Like this one, the quotes in this article were originally in Catalan or Spanish and were
translated by the authors. All first names mentioned are not the real names of the participants.
A. Gil-Juárez et al. Women's Studies International Forum 66 (2018) 56–62
58
oriented towards video games:
So, maybe that's why I like it, right? But I also think that it is very… it's
very cool, it's the only one that doesn't make me suffer, I mean, that it
doesn't present…a… yes, a situation of finding myself with something
that I can't solve, and not… and not enjoy it, you know? That is what
happens to me with video games, they're too much for me, I don't…I don't
enjoy them (Susanna)
Discussants managed to produce arguments that always developed
in such a way as to confirm the gender dichotomy. This was achieved by
maintaining that there were differences between men and women in
practices, uses, tastes, needs and habits and accounting for them as
individual choices or preferences (Rommes et al., 2007). This in turn
had the effect of naturalising that difference, anchoring it in the private/individual
world and not the public/social one. In an argumentative
context in which categorical differences were denied as such
and explained by individual preferences, the ‘different worlds’ metaphor
managed to remain: mothers did not play, girls were not supposed
to and video games were a possible cause of anxiety and suffering.
Accounting for gender and technology at home
Following our question about who does what at home when technological
stuff is involved, a gendered division of tasks was usually
described, as appears in other domains (Breen & Cooke, 2005;
Tremblay, 1997). Three main reasons were offered when the participants
tried to account for this domestic division: different abilities and
knowledge, habit or individual interests. Although gender was invisibilised,
as it did not surfaced explicitly as a possible cause, the resulting
domestic arrangement was clearly gendered.
Usually the first account that justified the ‘sexual’ division of technological
tasks was an account of the different abilities and knowledge
the members of the couple have. For example, a division of people from
the “humanities” and people from “science” regarding interests, tastes
and personal skills overlapped in the interviews with a technological
divide. Susanna attributed her low skill and interest in new technologies
to the fact that she was from ‘humanities’: ‘and maybe because I don't
have that skill, I mean, that matters too, doesn't it? That…that I'm more
from humanities’. Xavier, in answering the question about who was in
charge of appliances at home, gave the same explanation, making it
clear who studied humanities and who studied science, and assuming
that this explained the home distribution of tasks: ‘In my house I do it
because I studied science, and my wife studied humanities…’. But even
when this explanation was not possible, e.g. when both members of the
couple were ‘science’ people, the symmetry in skills did not change the
division of tasks. ‘…no, at home we all studied science, but Josep does it
more than I do, and I… if he does it, then I don't have to worry, I mean I do
other things, but if he needs me I get involved too, but…’… The justification
in this case was based on the fact that she did ‘other things’, but what
finally happened at home was that the male member of the scientific
couple managed the electronic appliances.
A different account of another gendered division of tasks emerged
when both members of the couple shared abilities and knowledge.
When Laia, the participant with a technological job, told us that: ‘… as
far as arranging hardware is concerned, I mean apparatuses, my husband
does it, but I do the I.T. I mean, when it comes to software, I know more than
he does, and he knows more about equipment than I do’, she shifted to a
different gendered arrangement: men take care of the hard part of
technology (hardware or apparatus) and women take care of the soft
part (software or code) (Guerrier, Evans, Glover, & Wilson, 2009). The
hardness or softness of technology is a product of discursive negotiations
and not a given fact. Video games offer a clear example of that as
they are present on both sides of the hard-soft/code-machine dichotomy,
and in their manufacturing men are present on both sides of this dichotomy.
In this case, this hard-soft dichotomy appeared when a
troubling gendered situation had to be accounted for: Laia actually was
technology proficient. Situating herself in the soft part of technology
allowed her to save face (Goffman, 1967) in that situation, maintaining
both herself and her husband on the ‘correct’ side of the gender binary.
In a cultural and political context in which public discourse cannot
explicitly support inequality and thus gender becomes invisible
(Rommes et al., 2007), this division of tasks brought about more justifications,
such as habits, as Carles told us:
… I mostly do the more technological things, but, that doesn't mean my
wife doesn't do things either… but, it's that, sometimes, we do things out
of habit, don't we? Electronic things or connecting things, well… it's set in
stone that I do it, but she could do it perfectly well.
Or individual interests can also be used to build a justification of this
division:
… I don't mean to say that at a given time she couldn't do it, but I think
that she hasn't needed to do it, and anyway, I think she doesn't like it,
and it's combined with the fact that, maybe I like it more, you know?…
(Joachim).
Under an egalitarian discursive regime, differences in individual
tastes were used as a justification for inequalities in practice. As per
‘needs talk’, ‘individual differences’ talk also “allows for value judgments
and normative relationships to appear as timeless and universal
facts and lends them moral force” (Lawler, 1999, cited in Morison &
Macleod, 2013). As pointed out by Rommes et al. (2007), the combination
of gender egalitarian discourses seen as an accomplished fact
with the individualist discourse presented by the choice of a profession
or an activity as something based on interests, tastes and merits, systematically
hides the consideration of tastes and ‘choices’ as something
that is affected not only by access to social, cultural and economic resources,
but also by being part of a society that has different expectations
for women and men. Similarly to gender discourses, equality
discourses have also performative consequences. Normative discourses
about individual differences in tastes embedded in equality discourses
reiterate assumptions regarding gender-segregated practices, which
remain intact, albeit unspeakable.
Technology trouble
As Morison and Macleod (2013) stated, to understand identity work,
we must pay attention to trouble and repair. Trouble emerges with the
difficulties in remaining consistent in narration (Morison & Macleod,
2013). Repair can then be done by correcting a previous position in
order to avoid criticism and also to maintain the illusion of gender as
anchored to the sexed body.
During the discussions of fathers and mothers, technology changed
in its nature with relative ease
Interviewer: Do you imagine her working in the technology industry in the
future?
I can't imagine her in that world; I see her focusing on other… more,
tangible things, because I find all of this to be more unreal, you know? So
her, no, I can't imagine her like that…(Isabel).
Whereas technology was presented as not suitable for a mother and
her daughter, because of it being intangible, in the following excerpt,
which was produced in the same group shortly after the preceding, it
was posited as not suitable for women in general, but precisely for the
opposite reason, for being too manual and concrete. A biological explanation
emerged in the discussion and the nature of technology was
apparently adapted to the requirements of the argument:
- It's different, a woman's brain, there are a lot of studies about it. A
A. Gil-Juárez et al. Women's Studies International Forum 66 (2018) 56–62
59
woman's brain is very different from a man's brain, so the trend is,
technology, manual skills are another thing that seems to be more aimed
at men, in the brain…(Jaume)
Therefore, there seemed to be an implicit consensus about the fixed
nature of gender that seemingly forced technology to be redefined in
order to fit into the variety of relationships women have with it. An
important instance of that occurred when one of the groups was confronted
with a mother who did work with technology, something that is
not easily accommodated in current models of femininity (Bury, 2011;
Faulkner, 2007; Kvande, 1999). It is important to look at the entire
sequence to see how this evolved during the discussion:
- It is that it is not…, I mean, the technological part does not have anything
of a manual technique, let's say (Laia).
- Yes but tech… (Jaume)
- It is super-rational, on the one hand, and super… I do believe that precisely
it combines, with much balance, what is of girls and what is of
boys, and I believe that few things are so… reflect so many different parts
of intelligence (Laia).
- We can't, eh, I mean, particularise, I mean, the fact that there are women
who work in technology does not mean that, I mean, it's not the general
rule, I mean, the trend of sexes I think, has been studied quite a lot, hasn't
it? One thing is the… manual skills, which appear to be stronger in the
man's brain, and we don't know why… and it's not… but it is stronger
than other activities that women have. They have qualities that men don't
have (Jaume).
- And what qualities do women have? (Laia).
- I, the job you do, I don't know, eh, but maybe it's more creative than
technical, is it? (Jaume).
- Of course, of course (Daniel).
- No, what's happening is that… (Laia).
- Because of course, if you do little drawings, and so on, and the result is
something very pretty… (Jaume).
- First of all, I do not d[raw]… (Laia).
- Maybe not…I mean, when I talk about technical, technical-scientif… I
mean scientific-technical (Jaume).
- …the procedure matters more to them than the (Isabel).
- …pure physics, pure engineering… (Jaume).
- …than the result (Isabel).
At this point, one of the discussants asked if this was all the time
allotted as the time was already consumed and the discussion ended
somewhat abruptly. We closed the discussion group and thanked them
all. When everybody stood up, Laia approached Jaume and told him:
- Do you know what happens? They are fundamentally creative careers,
it's not, you can't say: it's creative and as a result it's not that technical
(Laia).
- Bu… (Jaume).
- No, no, no, but that they are fundamentally creative means that you have
a language, you have a language and you have to use it to create
something, and that is what it is to be a… computer specialist (Laia).
During this sequence, Laia firstly transformed Jaume's assertion that
technology involves manual skills, stating that on the contrary, it is, on
the one hand, ‘super-rational’, but she did it without questioning brain
differences and accepting that there were boys' and girls' parts of intelligence.
In the controversy, it appeared to be easier to change technology's
characterisation than the brain's. Following this, Jaume insisted
on the manual character of technology, therefore making it not
suitable for women because of brain sex differences. Now technology
was made tangible, something you deal with, literally, with your hands.
Nevertheless, Laia's job made the discussion uncomfortable, since she
was not in an expected professional situation. When Laia attempted to
question Jaume's statement by asking sarcastically about women
qualities, she found that her own work within the technology field was
undermined. Her job in digital post-production of animation became
drawing pretty pictures. When Laia attempted to defend herself from
those who questioned that her work was truly technological, her interlocutors
changed the nature of technology again. Thus, the idea that
technology was not manual but scientific was developed. If you are a
woman what you do cannot be technical, or correspondingly, technical
has to be something different from what you do. The manual nature of
technology disappeared from Jaume's statements to become “rational”
(as Laia was arguing before), converting technology into something
pure, meaning closely linked to pure science, as opposed to an elided
applied science. Now, technology was changed, in Isabel's words, into
being more interested in the procedure (abstract) than in the result
(concrete). This rhetorical strategy managed to maintain gender in its
place. Technology, something apparently so material and so solid,
dissolved, deformed, molded and modified itself to the heat of the
discussion.
When Laia, who had been debased, took Jaume aside, she did so to
return technology to the field of the stereotypically feminine: creativity
and language. A turn was brought about in the nature of that which was
technical. However, in exchange for this turn, gender was maintained
as it was. Bringing technology closer to a field reputedly feminine
preserved femininity as the sphere of creativity and language. This last
version of technology managed to move it from the field of masculinity
to that of femininity. In this case, when trouble appeared, a thorough
work of repair to maintain consistency was undergone. However, as
maintaining both technology and gender consistency simultaneously
was impossible, technology unceasingly mutated its character – but not
so gender. It is arguable that faced with such a dilemma, gender, as
being much more central to social order, was given priority. The illusion
of brain differences, as a metonymy of the sexed body, was
maintained.
Discussion
Throughout the different discussion groups, the gender binary was
kept immutable through: (a) the justification of household task divisions
due to different interests or habits, even when there is equal
knowledge; and, (b) the taken for granted different leisure interests
boys and girls have. However, as shown in our last excerpt, when
people were confronted with facts that contradicted the dominant
perception that women are technologically mediocre or uninterested,
technology and not gender was flexibly interpreted. As Lie (2003)
synthesizes, apparently people “find it easier to redefine what ICT is
than to change their own and other people's ideas of gender differences'
(Lie, 2003: 29). Landström (2007) suggests that it would be beneficial
to the project of understanding the coproduction of gender and technology
to conceive feminist theory as a ‘struggle to render more mobile,
fluid, and transformable the means by which the female subject is
produced and represented’ (Grosz, 2005, p. 193, cited in Landström,
2007). Actually, some authors argue that “gender identity seems to be a
[…] flexible concept as the meaning of masculinity and femininity
seems to shift between contexts, might be irrelevant or downplayed in a
situation, or subverted in another” (Nentwich & Kelan, 2014). Although
it may seem paradoxical, this flexible character apparently does not
exclude the possibility of its reification.
The cherished possibility of overthrowing the givens we live by can
only occur within the same spaces in which domination is produced and
reproduced. In our highly technical societies, gender is largely produced
in relation to technology, and it can only be fully resisted
through this same relation. As co-construction of gender and technology
proponents suggest, how we understand, perceive and perform
gender is not only the result of discourses about what it means to be a
woman or a girl, it is also linked to a technical fabric comprising objects,
devices and procedures associated with them (Wajcman, 2004).
These contribute to stabilising and making certain norms, attributes,
A. Gil-Juárez et al. Women's Studies International Forum 66 (2018) 56–62
60
categories, guidelines and ways of life last over time. By describing a
world in which girls do not have skills or interest in technology, this
world comes into existence. However, the usual idea of the mutual coconstruction
and mutual stabilisation of gender and technology
(Faulkner, 2001; Oudshoorn, Rommes, & Stienstra, 2004; Wajcman,
1991, 2004) needs to be qualified for it is not a symmetric process.
In the first two parts of our results section, we have seen that
Butler's insight – that gender is an appearance constituted through the
repetition of normative acts that respond to concrete interpellations
from the discourses in which we live – can be incorporated into a coconstruction
of gender and technology approach. In addition, following
our interpretation of the long sequence commented on in the last part of
the results, we can also wonder with Butler (1997, p. 19) if “that constitution
is necessarily final or effective”. As Butler stated, these interpellations
and reiterations may lead to defective repetitions of social
mandates, which open up transformation possibilities (Pujal & Amigot,
2010). Laia's effort is not, despite everything, an insignificant effort.
The mutable citation of technology her presence and positioning generated,
may pave the path to other possible citations of gender. If, as she
argues, computing is language and creation then it is incorrectly located
on the masculine side of the gender dichotomy, according to the prevalent
stereotypes in the western world. Laia's argument facilitates the
emergence of a different comprehension of computing, a comprehension
that removes it from its usual location and allows it to be situated
in a space shared by everyone regardless of its ascribed gender. In the
long run, only the emergence of more of these androgynous spaces
could bring about the breaking up of a dichotomous gendered life.
In their discursive displaying sex differences were solidified.
However, the same did not occur with technology; surprisingly, as
technology is commonly considered to be at least as material and solid
as a gendered body, if not more so. For this reason, it is not possible to
establish any plan to resist the gender binary if we do not first understand
that if technological spaces persist as spaces of great inequality it
is because while the meaning of technology is flexibly interpreted when
needed, the meaning of gender is not; on the contrary, technology is
flexibly interpreted to avoid making gender flexible.
Conclusions
According to Landstrom, ‘an analytical asymmetry […] has haunted
feminist constructivist technology studies from the outset’ (2007, p.
10). The fact is that while technology has usually been approached in
these studies as gendered and having different meanings, uses and effects,
gender itself, even when it is discussed as a social and cultural
construction, has largely been dealt with as a fixed and evident construction
(Bray, 2007; Lagesen, 2007; Landström, 2007). Now, it is
clear why: the gender binary is strongly rooted in technological discourses
and practices and will not be destabilised if technology is assumed
as having all the flexibility. However, infusing performativity in
this field can give us some tools to understand its powers, imagine new
forms of destabilisation, and maybe avoid reproducing common discourses
within academic reflection.
Co-construction of gender and technology approaches could benefit
from incorporating Butler's work on the performative effects of the
repetition of social norms and of interpellation: to “make sense of the
role of technology […] in the re-assembly of how people construct
themselves and their actions” (Lagesen, 2012, p. 442), and, to avoid
“the risk of ‘black-boxing’ gender as an analytical tool, which leads to
‘an artificial analytic closure’ (Gill & Grint, 1995: 20)” (Landström,
2007, p. 10). In this work, we have considered gender as the result of
repeating norms and identity speeches made by our participants in
relation to technology. Probably, the mere presence of a masculine
designed technology constitutes a permanent reminder of how to act in
front of it – a permanent interpellation made by technology's presence.
Actually, technology is also performative in materialising the body, and
it does so through very effective performances (McKenzie, 2001). The
efficiency of machines makes efficient the people who work with them;
they impose their rhythms like in an assembly line, on what they expect
from you. As Conquergood (2002) remarks if we have to recognize the
embodied knowledge, ‘the practical knowledge through [which] corporeal
lives are lived’ (Loxley, 2007, p. 153), we have to acknowledge
not only the know-how but also the know-who, that is the who does
what with technology and how they ‘assemble’. As Landstrom comments:
‘“Assemblage” refigures subjectivity as constituted in complex
relationships with technology, placing the relationship as the crucial
mechanism, not identity’ (Landström, 2007 p. 17). When looking closer
at this assemblage, through our participants' narrations of their and
their children's relations to technology, we have seen that it is produced
within a heterosexual matrix and simultaneously within a set of
equality discourses that silence its gendering. This immutability of
gender contrasts severely with the mutability of technology.
Analysing the resistance to the bending of gender categories can be
politically frustrating but can prove fruitful to avoid essentialist backlashes.
As ‘talk performs the gender difference that heteronormativity
requires’ (Landström, 2007, p. 20) feminist claim that things could be
otherwise needs to rest on accurate accounts of how gender is performed
by talk in specific contexts. Other talk is possible; however, it is
not here yet in parenting involving technology.
Funding
This work was supported by the Spanish Ministry of Science and
Innovation (Grant: CSO2008-05203-E/SOC).
References
Anderson, N., Lankshear, C., Timms, C., & Courtney, L. (2008). Because it's boring, irrelevant
and I don't like computers: Why high school girls avoid professionally-oriented
ICT subjects. Computers & Education, 50(4), 1304–1318.
Barad, K. (2003). Posthumanist performativity: Toward an understanding of how matter
comes to matter. Signs, 28, 801–831.
Barcelona City Council (2012). Statistics > economic statistics > income and finances
> territorial distribution of household income > evolutive figures
2000–2012. Retrieved from http://www.bcn.cat/estadistica/angles/dades/
economia/renda/rdfamiliar/evo/rfbarris.htm.
Bijker, W. E., & Law, J. (1992). Shaping technology/building society. Studies in sociotechnical
change. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Bray, F. (2007). Gender and technology. Annual Review of Anthropology, 36, 1–21.
Breen, R., & Cooke, L. P. (2005). The persistence of the gendered division of domestic
labour. European Sociological Review, 21(1), 43–57.
Bury, R. (2011). She's geeky: The performance of identity among women working in IT.
International Journal of Gender, Science and Technology, 3(1), 33–53.
Butler, J. (1988). Performative acts and gender constitution: An essay in phenomenology
and feminist theory. Theatre Journal, 40, 519–531.
Butler, J. (1990). Gender trouble: Feminism and the subversion of identity. New York:
Routledge.
Butler, J. (1997). Excitable Speech. A politics of the performative. New York: Routledge.
Cockburn, C., & Ormrod, S. (1993). Gender and technology in the making. London: Sage.
Conquergood, D. (2002). Performance studies: Interventions and radical research. The
Drama Review, 46, 145–156.
Dobson, A. S. (2014a). Performative shamelessness on young women's social network
sites: Shielding the self and resisting gender melancholia. Feminism & Psychology,
24(1), 97–114.
Dobson, A. S. (2014b). Laddishness Online: The possible significations and significance of
‘performative shamelessness’ for young women in the post-feminist context. Cultural
Studies, 28(1), 142–164.
Faulkner, W. (2001). The technology question in feminism: A view from feminist technology
studies. Women's Studies International Forum, 24(1), 79–95.
Faulkner, W. (2007). “Nuts and bolts and people”: Gender-troubled engineering identities.
Social Studies of Science, 37(3), 331–356.
Gill, R., & Grint, K. (1995). Introduction: The gender-technology relation: Contemporary
theory and research. In T. Grint, & R. Gill (Eds.). The Gender-Technology Relation:
Contemporary Theory and Research (pp. 1–28). London: Taylor & Francis.
Gil-Juárez, A., Feliu, J., & Vitores, A. (2010). Performatividad Tecnológica de Género :
Explorando la Brecha Digital en el mundo del Videojuego (Gender Technological
Performativity: Exploring the Digital Divide in Video Gaming). Quaderns de Psicologia,
12(2), 209–226.
Gil-Juárez, A., Vitores, A., Feliu, J., & Vall-llovera, M. (2011). Brecha digital de género:
una revisión y una propuesta (Gender Digital Divide: A review and a proposal).
Revista Teoría de la Educación: Educación y Cultura en la Sociedad de la Información,
12(2), 25–53.
Goffman, E. (1967). Interaction ritual: Essays in face to face behavior. New York: Anchor/
A. Gil-Juárez et al. Women's Studies International Forum 66 (2018) 56–62
61
Doubleday.
Gordo Lopez, A. J., Contreras, P. P., & Cassidy, P. (2015). The [not so] new digital family:
Disciplinary functions of representations of children and technology. Feminism &
Psychology, 25(3), 326–346.
Greenberg, B. S., Sherry, J., Lachlan, K., Lucas, K., & Holmstrom, A. (2010). Orientations
to video games among gender and age groups. Simulation and Gaming, 41(2),
238–259.
Guerrier, Y., Evans, C., Glover, J., & Wilson, C. (2009). ‘Technical, but not very…’:
Constructing gendered identities in IT-related employment. Work, Employment and
Society, 23(3), 494–511.
Hayes, E. (2008). Girls, gaming, and trajectories of technological expertise. In Y. B. Kafai,
C. Heeter, J. Denner, & J. Y. Sun (Eds.). Beyond Barbie and Mortal Kombat: New perspectives
on gender and gaming (pp. 217–229). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Jenson, J., & de Castell, S. (2005). Her own boss: Gender and the pursuit of incompetent
play. Proceedings of the Digital Games Research Association Conference, Changing Views:
World in Play. Retrieved from http://www.digra.org/dl/db/06278.27455.pdf.
Jenson, J., & de Castell, S. (2011). Girls@Play: An ethnographic study of gender and
digital gameplay. Feminist Media Studies, 11(2), 167–179.
Kane, E. W. (2006). “No way my boys are going to be like that!”: Parents' responses to
children's gender nonconformity. Gender & Society, 20(2), 149–176.
Kelan, E. K. (2007). Tools and toys: Communicating gendered positions towards technology.
Information, Communication and Society, 10(3), 358–383.
Kvande, E. (1999). “In the belly of the beast”: Constructing femininities in engineering
organizations. European Journal of Women's Studies, 6, 305–328.
Lagesen, V. A. (2007). The strength of numbers: Strategies to include women into computer
science. Social Studies of Science, 37(1), 67–92.
Lagesen, V. A. (2012). Reassembling gender: Actor-network theory (ANT) and the making
of the technology in gender. Social Studies of Science, 42(3), 442–448.
Landström, C. (2007). Queering feminist technology studies. Feminist Theory, 8(1), 7–26.
Lawler, S. (1999). Children need but mothers only want: The power of “needs talk” in the
constitution of childhood. In J. Seymour, & P. Bagguley (Eds.). Relating intimacies:
Power and resistance (pp. 64–88). Basingstoke, UK: Macmillan.
Lie, M. (2003). He, she and It revisited: New perspectives on gender in the information society.
Oslo: Gyldendal Norsk Forlag.
Lorre, C., Prady, B., & Cendrowski, M. (2009). The creepy candy coating corollary [television
series episode]. In P. Chakos (Ed.). The Big Bang Theory. USA: Warner Brothers
Studios.
Loxley, J. (2007). Performativity. New York: Routledge.
McKenzie, J. (2001). Perform or Else: From discipline to performance. New York: Routledge.
Morison, T., & Macleod, C. (2013). A performative-performance analytical approach:
Infusing Butlerian theory into the narrative-discursive method. Qualitative Inquiry,
19(8), 566–577.
Nentwich, J. C., & Kelan, E. K. (2014). Towards a topology of “doing gender”: An analysis
of empirical Research and its challenges. Gender, Work & Organization, 21(2),
121–134.
Ormrod, S. (1994). Feminist sociology and methodology: Leaky black boxes in gender/
technology relations. In R. Gill, & K. Grint (Eds.). The Gender–Technology Relation:
Contemporary Theory and Research (pp. 31–48). London: Taylor and Francis.
Oudshoorn, N., & Pinch, T. (Eds.). (2003). How users matter: The co-construction of users
and technology. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Oudshoorn, N., Rommes, E., & Stienstra, M. (2004). Configuring the user as everybody:
Gender and design cultures in information and communication technologies. Science,
Technology & Human Values, 29(1), 30–63.
Pinch, T. J., & Bijker, W. E. (1984). The social construction of facts and artefacts: Or how
the sociology of science and the sociology of technology might benefit each other.
Social Studies of Science, 14(3), 339–441.
Pinch, T. J., & Bijker, W. E. (1986). Science, relativism and the new sociology of technology:
Reply to Russell. Social Studies of Science, 16, 347–360.
Pujal, M., & Amigot, P. (2010). El binarismo de género como dispositivo de poder social,
corporal y subjetivo. Quaderns de Psicologia, 12(2), 131–148.
Rommes, E., Overbeek, G., Scholte, R., Engels, R., & De Kemp, R. (2007). ‘I'm not interested
in computers’: Gender-based occupational choices of adolescents.
Information, Communication and Society, 10(3), 299–319.
Tremblay, D. G. (1997). Change and continuity: Transformations in the gendered division
of labour in a context of technological and organizational change. In A. F. Grundy, D.
Köhler, V. Oechtering, & U. Petersen (Eds.). Proceedings of the 6th International IFIPConference
Bonn, Germany. (pp. 293–304).
Wajcman, J. (1991). Feminism confronts technology. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Wajcman, J. (2004). Technofeminism. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Wajcman, J. (2010). Feminist theories of technology. Cambridge Journal of Economics,
34(1), 143–152.
Walkerdine, V. (2006). Playing the game: Young girls performing feminity in video game
play. Feminist Media Studies, 6(4), 519–537.
Winn, J., & Heeter, C. (2009). Gaming, gender, and time: Who makes time to play? Sex
Roles, 61(1–2), 1–13.
