The role of IT literacy in defining digital divide policy needs
Enrico Ferro a,
⁎, Natalie C. Helbig b
, J. Ramon Gil-Garcia c
a Istituto Superiore Mario Boella (ISMB), Italy
b Center for Technology in Government/SUNY Albany, USA
c Centro de Investigación y Docencia Económicas, Mexico
article info abstract
Available online 3 November 2010
Keywords:
Digital divide
IT literacy
Policy
ICT Governance
This article expands our current understanding of the digital divide by examining differences in individuals' IT
skills acquisition. In the last two decades scholars have gradually refined the conceptualization of the digital
divide, moving from a dichotomous model mainly based on access, to a multidimensional model accounting for
differences in usage levels and actors' perspectives. Digital divide views tend to focus on groups of users and
user characteristics and focus less on different processes of use. As models of the digital divide became more
complex, research focused on deepening the understanding of demographic and socioeconomic differences
between adopters and non-adopters. While IT literacy is an important factor in digital divide research, and
studies examine user characteristics with respect to IT literacy, few studies make the process of basic IT literacy
acquisition their main focal point (Selwyn, 2005). This perspective furthers our thinking by expanding the
notion of user characteristics beyond demographic and socioeconomic differences to differences in the
processes leading to internet use. Based on a dataset referring to an Italian region, this paper presents a
metaphorical interpretation of the digital divide in general and explores the process of IT skills acquisition in
particular. Our analysis shows the key role of self-learning and the presence of three distinct approaches in IT
skills acquisition leading to different needs in terms of policy. We argue that these preliminary results are a
useful starting point for the design of more effective and sophisticated digital inclusion policies.
© 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
In his bestseller The World Is Flat, Thomas Friedman, columnist for
the New York Times, argued that in the year 2000 the world entered a
new era of globalization spearheaded by “individuals globalizing”. In
stressing the key role played by individuals, whom he characterized as
dynamic agents in information-based economies, Friedman's analysis
adds an interesting perspective to the framing of digital divide
debates. As a “public policy problem” the digital divide shifts from a
matter of pure social inequality to a matter of strategic importance in
a global race for competitiveness (Drori & Jang, 2003). At present, the
different patterns of globalization that individuals pursue are still
vague and surely require further investigation. Nevertheless, it seems
reasonable to suggest that worldwide access to people and information/knowledge
are two potentially key ingredients within globalization
processes. From a policy standpoint, the emphasis placed on the
importance of a single information space for the creation of an
inclusive information society in the i2010 European Strategic Plan
seems to support this thesis. In the Plan, the use of information and
communications technologies (ICTs) underpins the social and
economic progression of nation-states throughout the first stages of
the twenty-first century (Selwyn, 2003). The ability to use ICTs and
work with information may therefore be considered “the indispensable
grammar of modern life” and a fundamental aspect of citizenship
in the prevailing information age (Wills, 1999).
The aim of this paper is to look into the process of IT skills
acquisition in order to provide policy makers with new and refined
perspectives on the digital divide in an attempt to effectively shape
and frame inclusion policies or e-Government services. The article is
structured in seven sections including these introductory comments.
The second section briefly reviews relevant literature on the digital
divide. Section 3 presents the research design and methods used in
this paper. Section 4 provides evidence on the importance of IT skills
for internet access and use and presents an illustrative classification of
internet users (including non-users). The fifth section lays out a digital
divide metaphor and provides a simplified yet practical representation
of reality to policy makers based on the empirical evidence
presented in this paper. Section 6 provides a socioeconomic
description of user types, while the last section includes some
concluding remarks and a discussion of important policy implications.
We are aware of the simplification effort behind the metaphor
presented in this paper, but we think it has an important practical
value for policy makers and other actors interested in understanding
and designing policies related to this phenomenon. Implicitly, many
digital divide policies conceptualize the phenomenon in a simplistic
Government Information Quarterly 28 (2011) 3–10
⁎ Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: ferro@ismb.it (E. Ferro), nhelbig@ctg.albany.edu (N.C. Helbig),
joseramon.gil@cide.edu (J.R. Gil-Garcia).
URL: http://www.enricoferro.com (E. Ferro).
0740-624X/$ – see front matter © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.giq.2010.05.007
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Government Information Quarterly
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/govinf
way and, therefore, many of these policies do not attempt to target
specific citizen groups in ways that take into consideration some
important differences among them. This paper is a first step towards
recognizing some of these differences in terms of IT literacy and the
acquisition process, as well as the role of IT literacy in the definition of
better and more targeted digital divide policies.
2. Digital divide and IT literacy
The digital divide is the study of the relationship between
information and communication technologies (ICTs) and groups of
individuals, who are situated within a complex arrangement of social,
environmental, political, and economic issues (Gil-Garcia, Ferro, &
Helbig, 2006). Information Technology (IT) literacy is seen as both a
determinant of the digital divide and as a divide itself.
The following section briefly outlines the viewpoints and assumptions
taken by different authors. The last 15 years yielded three main
approaches to understanding the digital divide: access digital divide,
multi-dimensional digital divide, and multi-perspective digital divide.
During that time, IT skills and information literacy research evolved
(Warschauer, 2003; Hargittai, 2002a, 2009; Ferro, Dwivedi, GilGarcia,
& Williams, 2009); focusing on the development of the
concept, ways to measurement it, and its impact on the digital divide.
2.1. The digital divide as a simple dichotomous phenomenon: The role of
IT literacy
A dichotomous view of the digital divide assumes that it is a simple
separation between ‘haves’ and ‘have nots’; the ‘haves’ have access to
computers and the internet and the ‘have nots’ do not. The focus is on
understanding an individual's access to technology, and not the
complexity of individual use. Scholars have argued that a divide, if it
exists at all, is solely because of an ‘access to technology problem’ and
they subsequently frame the debate as an inherent delay in the
diffusion of technology among different geographic areas and social
groups (Adriani & Becchetti, 2003; Compaine, 2001). A dichotomous
view of the digital divide tends to neglect the influence of IT literacy
and its impact on access.
2.2. The digital divide as a multi-dimensional phenomenon: The role of IT
literacy
A multi-dimensional conceptualization views the digital divide as
emerging from a number of endogenous and exogenous factors. This
view challenges the simple access dichotomy and assumes access to be
‘almost a given’ (Servon, 2002; Norris, 2001; Ferro, Gil-Garcia, & Helbig,
2008; Dewan & Riggins, 2005). The focus is on individuals and their use
of information technology. IT literacy is an important, and frequently
included, dimension in digital divide theoretical and statistical models
(Bélanger & Carter, 2009; Van Dijk & Van Deursen, 2009).
IT literacy is also described as a multi-dimensional phenomenon.
Some scholars focus on definitions (Mossberger, Tolbert, & Stansbury,
2003) and measurement (Hargittai, 2002b, 2009; Van Dijk & Van
Deursen, 2009; Van Dijk, 2005), while others focus on understanding
the IT literacy divide specifically (Hargittai, 2002a; Mossberger et al.,
2003). Mossberger et al. (2003) described IT skills as the knowledge
and skills needed to use IT effectively, highlighting the need for both
technical competencies (e.g., skills needed to operate hardware and
software) and information literacy (e.g., the ability to recognize when
information use can solve a problem).
2.3. The digital divide as a multi-perspective phenomenon: The role of IT
literacy
Some scholars have begun re-theorizing technology's relationship
with race, gender, and culture (Castells, 2001; Kennedy, Wellman, &
Klement, 2003; Warf, 2001). A multi-perspective or emergent view
rejects that any one group of individuals inherently uses technologies
differently than the majority, but “recognize[s] that individuals and
communities employ technologies for very specific goals, linked often
to their histories and social locations” (Hines, Nelson, & Tu, 2001, p. 5).
These scholars argue “barriers to access operate on many levels and
therefore solutions must take multiple approaches” (Hines et al.,
2001, p. 5). For example, Dholakia (2006) found that while gross
differences between genders in internet use have narrowed, the
issues of “gendered patterns of computer and internet use will emerge
and diverge in different cultures and societies based on their
particular construction of gender roles” (p. 239). Scholars call for
redefining and reframing the concept of the digital divide in public
discourse and argue that policy solutions need to be developed based
on this conceptual redirection (Helbig, Gil-Garcia, & Ferro, 2009).
Likewise, viewing IT literacy from a multi-perspective view opens
up the possibility to examine more closely the acquisition patterns of
IT literacy. IT literacy researchers suggest that the idea of literacy is
complex (Bawden, 2008; Selwyn, 2005; Warschauer, 2003) and
cannot be reduced to a simple set of discrete behaviors or skills.
Warschauer (2003) argues for understanding literacy “as a set of
social practices rather than a narrow cognitive skill” (p. 43).
Understanding IT literacy as embedded within the social, political,
and environmental contexts fits a multi-perspective approach.
Some scholars have studied the importance of IT literacy for
internet access and internet use, but few examine the process of basic
IT skills acquisition and policy development. We argue that understanding
the process, including both informal and formal learning
(Selwyn, 2005), is essential for the design of effective inclusion
policies. That is why this analysis will be aimed not only at testing the
importance of IT literacy for internet access and use, but also at casting
some light on the different patterns of IT skills acquisition.
3. Research design and methods
The empirical analysis presented in this paper is based on a
longitudinal data set made available by the ICT Observatory of the
Piedmont Region in Italy that annually conducts CATI surveys on the
diffusion, use and impact of ICT among the citizenry on samples of
over 2000 individuals. The total population of the region is 4.3 million
inhabitants. The samples used in this paper were taken from a
database provided by the Italian National Statistical Institute (ISTAT)
whose data refer to the last periodical census carried out in 2001.
Thus, people without a fixed phone line are not represented in the
samples. The stratified samples were created using a differentiated
probability approach in order to over-represent segments with a
higher variance in terms of technology adoption and usage (i.e., young
versus older people). The variables adopted for the stratification of the
samples were: age, gender, and size of town of residence. Following
the guidelines provided by the European Statistical Institute, people
less than 16 years old were excluded from the sample.
Respondents were asked questions about computer ownership,
internet access, and internet use. In particular, the concept of basic
IT literacy (Mossberger et al., 2003) has been operationalized in the
surveys as the ‘ability to use a computer and internet for
information search and email exchange’. Relevant individual
demographics and household characteristics were also collected.
The main analytical tools used for the analysis and interpretation of
data are multiple linear regression models, hierarchical cluster
analysis, and cross tabulations. The inclusion of multivariate
techniques contributed to increase the robustness of the results
and to reduce the risk of exposure to misinterpretations deriving
from the use of simple bivariate analyses, as highlighted by Vehovar,
Sicherl, Husing, and Dolnicar (2006) in their methodological study
on digital divide.
4 E. Ferro et al. / Government Information Quarterly 28 (2011) 3–10
4. Analysis and discussion
The next subsections have two main purposes. The first set of analyses
applies two of the three approaches presented in the digital divide
literature review section to the phenomenon of internet access and
internet use: (1) the access divide model and (2) the multi-dimensional
divide model. It provides evidence of the importance of some factors as
determinants of internet access, as well as evidence regarding the
importance of internet access as one of the determinants of the extent of
internet use. The second section uses cluster analysis to uncover how
individuals are learning IT literacy skills and associated experience
(Hargittai, 2010). This clustering is exploratory, but provides a jumping
off point to illustrate the potential range of processes which result when
viewing IT literacy through a multiple perspective lens. A multiple
perspective lens does not privilege any one user characteristic; this leaves
room for determining how individuals acquire IT literacy from their own
primary vantage point. Viewing IT literacy as a process, rather than as a
static skills set, the analysis illustrates how policy makers can create
policies aimed at promoting IT skills acquisition. Together these two
subsections highlight the importance of internet access and internet use
and suggest some areas for future exploration.
4.1. Internet access, internet use, and IT literacy
Using multiple regression analysis, this section provides empirical
evidence regarding the importance of IT skills on internet access and
internet use. The statistical analysis follows the most important ideas
of the access model and the multi-dimensional model characterized in
the literature review section of this paper. Table 1 presents the results
of our application of both models and uses the number of devices for
internet access as a dependent variable.1 Income is positively
associated with internet access, which is not surprising, since people
need money to buy the necessary devices to access the internet. Age is
significantly associated with internet access, but in the access divide
model the relationship is negative and in the multi-dimensional
model it is positive. That is, as a general trend, older people tend to
have a smaller number of devices to access the internet. However,
once controlling for PC use, IT literacy, household size, and occupation,
older people seem to have a greater number of devices. This seems to
suggest that once older people accept technology and have the
necessary skills, they tend to have more devices to access and use the
internet. This might be because they have the time and money
necessary to buy these new devices. In addition, education and
attitude towards computers are positively associated with internet
access. Therefore, people with more formal education and with a
positive attitude towards computers and related technologies tend to
have more devices to access the internet. Finally, being female is
negatively associated with internet access (measured as the number
of devices to access the internet). That is, in general terms and as a
trend, females have a smaller number of devices to access the internet
than males.
Several variables related to the multi-dimensional divide model
were found to be important determinants. Speaking English is
positively associated with internet access. This may be because
many of the internet websites have content in English only;
individuals who do not speak English have fewer incentives for
accessing the internet than individuals who do speak English. Having
a PC at home and individual use of a PC are positively associated with
internet access. This is generally expected. The logic is that individuals
that have a PC at home and use it for other activities will use it at some
point to access the internet. Employment status is a significant
determinant of internet access. Employed individuals have significantly
less access to the internet than students, which was our
referent variable for this set of dummy variables.
Finally, basic IT literacy is positively associated with internet
access. This is important because in order to access the internet an
individual needs to have basic IT literacy. Having IT literacy is a
necessary, but not a sufficient, condition for internet access and use.
Individuals should also have an incentive to access and use the
internet. Overall, there was an improvement in adjusted R2 from 0.403
to 0.575.
Table 2 presents the results of three models using the extent of
internet use as the dependent variable. The extent of use is
operationalized as the number of activities an individual performs
using the internet. The first regression model is based purely on the
access divide view; it considers internet access as the only relevant
factor affecting internet use directly. The second model includes the
factors mentioned in the access divide view, but tests direct relationships
from all of them to internet use. Finally, the third model
incorporates additional variables related to the multi-dimensional
divide view, including IT literacy.
Overall, there is an improvement in adjusted R2
, which went from
0.371 in the access divide model to 0.560 in the multi-dimensional
divide model. As expected, internet access is positively associated
with internet use and the most important factor in all specifications.
Income is positively associated with internet use in the extended
access divide model, but becomes statistically insignificant once
controlling for other variables. It seems that the impact of income on
internet use is indirect and once we incorporate the variables that are
the authentic direct influences to the model income becomes
statistically insignificant. Variables such as access to a PC at home,
level of IT literacy, and occupation appear to have income as their
underlying influence. Age is negatively associated with internet use.
The younger an individual is the more he or she uses the internet.
Education and attitude towards computers are positively associated
with internet use. The effect of formal education on internet use is
greater and more statistically significant than its effect on internet
Table 1
Determinants of internet access (number of devices).
Independent variables Access divide model Multi-dimensional
divide model
Constant −0.343** (−2.232) −0.217 (−1.537)
Income b0.001*** (7.675) b0.001*** (3.813)
Age −0.009*** (−10.483) 0.002* (1.776)
Education 0.174*** (8.139) 0.033* (1.700)
Attitude towards computers 0.093*** (9.705) 0.038*** (4.450)
Nationality (Italian= 1) 0.164 (1.603) 0.028 (0.319)
Location (Town= 1) 0.079 (1.290) 0.031 (0.593)
Location (Village= 1) 0.049 (0.803) 0.013 (0.240)
Gender (Female= 1) −0.109*** (−3.860) −0.047* (−1.916)
Other language (English) 0.120*** (3.966)
PC at home 0.105*** (3.191)
PC use 0.630*** (16.756)
IT skills 0.083*** (2.685)
Household size 0.003 (0.235)
Occupation (Employee= 1) −0.258*** (−4.744)
Occupation (Self employed= 1) −0.264*** (−4.070)
Occupation (Unemployed= 1) −0.231*** (−3.101)
Occupation (Other= 1) −0.338*** (−5.132)
R2 0.407 0.580
Adjusted R2 0.403 0.575
F-statistic 115.712*** 108.750***
Note: T-statistics are in parentheses under coefficient values. Those coefficients
followed by * are significant at the 10% level, those followed by ** are significant at
the 5% level, and those followed by *** are significant at the 1% level.
1 The overarching study operationalized Internet access in several ways, from a
dichotomous variable representing whether a respondent indicated he or she had
access to the Internet, to the number of locations in which she or he had access, to the
number of devices she or he used to access the Internet. We think that this later
measure is interesting, because it shows different alternatives that a single person
could have for accessing the Internet as a continuum, instead of a dichotomy. We think
that this representation has some important advantages, especially the fact that access
could be seen as more than having or not having Internet access and it is, at least in
part, a matter of individual choice.
E. Ferro et al. / Government Information Quarterly 28 (2011) 3–10 5
access. Using the internet for several activities seems to involve not
only IT literacy, but also a level of formal education that allows the
individuals to understand the possibilities of the internet and to use it
meaningfully. Finally, being a female is negatively associated with
internet use.
Similar to internet access, there were several variables related to
the multi-dimensional divide that were significantly associated to
internet use. For example, speaking English was positively associated
with internet use. As with internet access, the explanation of this
result could be related to the fact that most content available in
websites is still in English and, therefore, there are some activities that
are only available to individuals if they know how to speak English.
Having a PC at home was negatively associated with internet use. This
result could seem surprising, but it may be just an indication that, in
contrast to internet access, for internet use having a PC at home is not
an important factor, because people can have access in other
locations. Finally, basic IT skills were positively associated with the
extent of internet use. For internet use, it seems clear that, similar to
internet access, IT literacy is even more important than other factors.
In order to perform more activities using the internet, individuals
need to know more about how to use a computer and how to use the
internet in terms of IT literacy (specifically technical skills) (Mossberger
et al., 2003).
In summary, it seems clear that basic IT literacy is an important
determinant of internet access and internet use and that it is
positively associated with both. That is, basic IT literacy significantly
increases the likelihood of greater internet access and greater extent
of internet use. Since, not everybody has the same level of skills, for
research and practical purposes, it is important to understand the
differences and similarities among internet users. Using hierarchical
cluster analysis and cross-tabulations, the following section provides
the empirical foundation for a preliminary classification of internet
users (including non-users). User typologies are one way to examine
which people conduct what types of activities online (Hargittai &
Hinnant, 2008).
4.2. IT literacy acquisition and internet use
The aim of this section is to develop a user typology that examines
differences between users based on internet use and preferences for
acquiring IT skills. Hierarchical cluster analysis and cross tabulations
were used to examine internet usage levels, purpose of use, and
acquisition of basic IT skills and their evolution over time. The
analyses presented in the first three subsections were conducted on
the 2004 dataset, while the last subsection shows the dynamics of the
phenomenon in the 4 years following (2004–2008).
4.2.1. Internet usage levels
The first cluster analysis takes into account different levels and
types of internet usage (or experience). Interviewees were asked if
they used the internet and what applications they used (motivation).
The analysis highlighted the presence of three clusters (see Fig. 1).
The first cluster was labeled non/sporadic users (51%) since
respondents exhibited ‘a lack of’ or ‘very limited use’ of the internet.
The second cluster was labeled as periodic users (25%) since
respondents showed more regular usage, mainly information
searches and email exchange. Finally, the last cluster was defined as
regular users (24%) since respondents made use of a much wider
range of internet applications (i.e. videoconferencing, VoIP, eshopping,
blogging and auctions).
These results provide an indication of the diversity of users and the
range of usage levels, regardless of demographic or socioeconomic
factors. Nevertheless, they do not provide insights as to what the
determinants of these differences are. For this reason, a second cluster
analysis was conducted to subsequently cross the results of both
analyses.
4.2.2. Purpose of internet use
The second cluster analysis focused on the purposes, or motivations,
driving internet use. Respondents were asked to list the main
purposes for which they used the internet. In the population
considered, two clusters were identified. Cluster 1 (about 80% of the
population) and Cluster 2 (about 20% of the population). Interestingly
enough, the discriminating variable determining whether a respondent
belonged to one or the other group was the use of internet for
leisure.
Fig. 2 shows a breakdown of the four main purposes of use by
cluster. Although the data presented focuses on the purpose of use
and not on the level of enjoyment generated by the use of technology,
it seems reasonable to assert that a portion of the population (cluster
2) does not appear to perceive internet technologies as a potential
Fig. 1. Internet usage levels.
Table 2
Determinants of internet use (extent of use).
Independent
variables
Access divide
model
Access divide model
(extended)
Multi-dimensional
divide model
Constant 0.376***
(6.545)
−0.824* (−1.650) −0.229 (−0.434)
Internet access 2.929***
(35.882)
1.842*** (16.408) 1.347*** (7.183)
Income b0.001*** (2.881) b0.001 (1.555)
Age −0.023*** (−7.644) −0.013*** (−3.194)
Education 0.550*** (7.801) 0.369*** (5.035)
Attitude towards
computers
0.253*** (7.906) 0.221*** (6.999)
Nationality
(Italian= 1)
0.276 (0.831) 0.175 (0.543)
Location (Town= 1) 0.050 (0.249) 0.057 (0.294)
Location (Village=1) −0.012 (−0.060) 0.031 (0.162)
Gender (Female=1) −0.554*** (−5.980) −0.449*** (−4.926)
Other language
(English)
0.539*** (4.785)
PC at home −0.271* (−1.659)
IT skills 0.238** (2.059)
Household size −0.060 (−1.354)
Occupation
(Employee= 1)
−0.256 (−1.254)
Occupation
(Self employed= 1)
−0.391 (−1.603)
Occupation
(Unemployed= 1)
−0.440 (−1.579)
Occupation (Other=1) −0.667*** (−2.702)
R2 0.371 0.532 0.566
Adjusted R2 0.371 0.528 0.560
F-statistic 1287.531*** 168.124*** 113.923***
Note: T-statistics are in parentheses under coefficient values. Those coefficients
followed by * are significant at the 10% level, those followed by ** are significant at
the 5% level, and those followed by *** are significant at the 1% level.
6 E. Ferro et al. / Government Information Quarterly 28 (2011) 3–10
source of leisure or entertainment. In other words, they do not seem
to derive as much pleasure from using these technologies.
By crossing the results obtained from the two cluster analyses
conducted so far, some interesting results emerge. Fig. 3 shows a clear
trend may be identified between sporadic internet use and lack of
pleasure derived from using technology for leisure purposes. This
constitutes initial evidence that the presence of different attitudes/
approaches to technology may lead to different usage levels. From a
policy standpoint, it goes without saying that being able to
understand and account for the presence of different attitudes/
approaches to technology represents a key ingredient for the creation
of more effective inclusion measures.
4.2.3. Basic IT literacy acquisition
The final part of the analysis focused on basic IT literacy
acquisition. In particular, interviewees were asked how they learned
to use personal computers and the internet. From the results
presented in Fig. 4, two main considerations are explored. First, a
good portion of IT literacy acquisition appears to occur through an
informal process of learning by doing. This result is suggested by the
important role played by the self-learning process (present in nearly
60% of respondents) and is consistent with other similar research
findings (Selwyn, 2005; Van Dijk, 2005) The prominence of selflearning
is not specific to the geographical area considered but may be
found across Europe as well (Van Dijk & Van Deursen, 2009). For
example, the data published on Eurostat's website concerning e-skills
shows that the percentage of individuals obtaining IT skills through
formalized training in educational institutions is as low as 20%
(Eurostat, 2006). The second consideration regards the fact that basic
IT literacy is mainly acquired at school or in the workplace.
Fig. 5 cross-analyzes the answers about literacy acquisition with
the results obtained from the first cluster analysis, and reveals that
self-learning emerged as a common characteristic for both regular and
periodic users. For sporadic users, the presence of self-learning
persists, but with a significantly lower importance. This suggests that
participation in formal training courses may be an appropriate way to
overcome the initial inertia that prevents non-users from embarking
on the learning process leading to the acquisition of IT skills. Such
results offer useful insight into the design of more effective and better
targeted policies aimed at reducing different types of digital divides.
4.2.4. The evolution over time
The final part of the analysis was aimed at providing some insights
into how the situation in terms of users/non-users distribution
evolved over time. For this reason, the first cluster analysis on
internet usage was carried out on a set of data collected for the next
4 years (2005–2008).
By looking at the evolution of the distribution of user types a few
interesting results emerge (see Fig. 6). While in 2004 such distribution
showed a negative slope (dashed line), a difference in the migration
rate from periodic users to regular users and from sporadic users to
periodic users has gradually lead to a “U” shaped distribution in
society. This indicates an initial polarization of society, particularly
between non/sporadic users and regular users.
The identified trend may constitute a possible illustration of the
impact of technology as trend amplifier (Van Dijk, 1999, pp. 153-154).
The above considerations suggest the need for careful reflection if we
Fig. 2. Purpose of internet use by cluster.
Fig. 3. Level of entertainment use by cluster.
Fig. 4. Process of IT skills acquisition.
Fig. 5. Proportion of self-learning preferences by type of user.
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
Non/sporadic users Basic users Advanced users
Basis: All Respondents
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008
Fig. 6. Evolution of user types distribution.
E. Ferro et al. / Government Information Quarterly 28 (2011) 3–10 7
are to understand the reasons behind such a polarization process and
how it may be reduced. The use of the digital divide metaphor
presented in the next section intends to be a first step in this direction.
5. A digital divide user typology: The athletes, the laid-back, and
the needy
From the analysis carried out, the acquisition of basic IT skills
emerged as mainly occurring through a process of “self-learning”
(learning by doing). The process of skills acquisition is in fact usually
triggered by either an interest in technology or by a constraint/
requirement posed by school or at work. For this reason we compared
the acquisition of basic IT skills to the act of climbing a set of stairs, in
which the first step is in relative terms higher than the others. Going
up and down the stairs is an action that has to be carried out alone and
the people that do it may be divided in three groups: (1) athletes, (2)
laidback, and (3) needy.
5.1. The athletes
These are the people that climb stairs mainly because they enjoy
exercising and being fit. These are technophiles; they are very keen on
technology and usually have an innovator or early adopter behavior
because of the pleasure and other benefits they extract from using
technology. These benefits justify the learning costs that they have to
bear to keep their skill set up to date. Athletes extensively use the
internet in both their professional as well as their private daily life. To
a certain extent, they should not be a concern for policy-makers since
they enjoy keeping the pace with technological evolution and change
and thus they do not need any kind of external incentive.
5.2. The laidback
People in this category have the physical ability to climb the stairs;
nevertheless, they are reluctant to do it. In other words, they have the
necessary intellectual capacity to acquire IT skills on their own, but do
not have sufficient incentives to do it. This may be attributed to a lack
of clarity about the potential benefits or to the fact that learning costs
far exceed the perceived benefits. They thus adopt a minimum effort
approach that results in a very basic use of the internet (mainly
information search and email exchange). These people in terms of
Rogers (1962) could be classified as “early-late majority”. Their
adoption may be accelerated by policy makers through two levers.
The first one is an incentive lever—policy makers could explain to
these people (through sensitization activities such as communication
campaigns, conferences, etc.) what benefits could be enjoyed by
climbing the stairs (i.e.: there is a cake waiting for you at the end of
the stairs). The other policy that could be used is a “coercive” measure,
which can foster the wide diffusion of IT requirements in school and in
the workplace (i.e., to ask teachers to require that students increase
their use of PCs to complete work).
5.3. The needy
These people, regardless of their willingness to climb the stairs, do
not have the physical capacity to climb the first step (the highest) and
need external help. That is, even when they may be willing to use the
internet in their daily life, they lack the basic IT skills and cultural
background to win the initial inertia for starting using it in meaningful
ways. What is important to stress is that the external help needed by
this group of people will mainly serve to overcome the first step of the
staircase. In fact, similar to the other categories, their learning process
is characterized by significant self-learning.
We are aware of the fact that the profiles included in the above user
typology do not constitute an exhaustive representation of the nuances
of user profiles and policy needs present in society. Nevertheless we are
convinced that it provides a reasonable heuristic. As a matter of fact, the
design of public policies requires a process of problem simplification in
order to identify few effective measures. The metaphor should be
interpreted as a first attempt to represent an issue whose complexity
often makes it difficult to be communicated and manipulated. Despite
the room for improvement and refinement, the metaphor offered may
represent a valuable tool to be used for framing the problem and finding
possible solutions. This is due to the fact that the definition of three
different profiles in terms of policy needs provides a more adherent yet
manageable representation of reality. Research needs to be done to
determine the possible range of policy levers that can be used to address
the issues associated with different patterns of IT skills acquisition.
Further research and investigation will help flesh out the right mix and
balance of policy solutions.
6. Viewing usage level and types through a traditional digital
divide lens
Traditional digital divide literature privileges demographic and
socioeconomic factors as the main determinants of the divide (e.g.,
gender divide, income divide, etc.). The aim of this section is to
examine the socioeconomic characteristics of the three types of users
identified above. In order to do so, some descriptive statistics have
been inserted in order to cross different users' types with the main
socio-economic variables.
In terms of geographical dispersion, the data show a higher
concentration of advanced users in urban areas (see Fig. 7). This
represents an important piece of information for both policy makers
aiming at stimulating demand for ICT related services and telecom
carriers considering infrastructure investments in rural areas. Being
aware of such heterogeneity in distribution may allow for the creation
of more effective policies and more accurate estimates of the latent
demand present in areas not yet reached by broadband infrastructure.
As far as education and income are concerned, the graphs in Fig. 8
show a clear positive correlation. As a matter of fact, the percentage of
wealthy, educated people increases with usage sophistication. It
would be interesting to determine what the causal relationship
between the variables considered might be; whether the presence of
IT skills leads to higher education levels and salaries or vice-versa.
Although answering this question may prove to be difficult, some
preliminary indications may be found in Fig. 9 The chart depicts the
relationship between internet users' types and employment status.
A high level of computer literacy does not seem to be a sufficient
condition to produce a marked increase in the chances of finding a job.
As it may be noticed from the graph, the percentage of unemployed
people does not vary significantly among different user types. A
reduction is present between non-users and basic users, but the
percentage of unemployed people increases among advanced users.
This is an important indication for policy makers, since it confirms the
role of IT literacy as a necessary but not sufficient condition for
Fig. 7. Geographical distribution of user types.
8 E. Ferro et al. / Government Information Quarterly 28 (2011) 3–10
reducing unemployment levels. Such skills should thus be considered
as a catalyzer that requires complementary knowledge and skills to
ignite a professional as well as personal development process. To
strengthen the robustness of the user type characterization, a further
multivariate analysis has been conducted (Table 3).
The exercise provided a number of confirmations and some new
insights. Income and education have been verified to exert a direct
influence on usage proficiency. The weakness of the relationship
between ICT literacy and occupation was also still confirmed. In
addition, the presence of a gender as well as generational usage divide
emerged clearly. Finally, the ability to speak a foreign language and
the size of the household seem to be correlated with advanced usage
behavior. Further analysis still needs to be conducted to reach a deep
understanding of the above phenomena. Nevertheless, a number of
hypotheses may be put forward to stimulate the discussion. The
presence of a generational usage divide may be explained by the
presence of a relationship between the generation of the users and the
generations of applications/technologies (email and browsing vs.
social computing). Proficiency in a foreign language, instead, may help
increase the perceived utility attached to the use of the internet
thanks to the opportunity to access a wider range of content.
7. Conclusion
The research presented in this article provides evidence for a
conceptualization of the digital divide as a complex phenomenon
transcending simple information access problems. The use of different
interpretation models has shown the important role basic IT skills
play on both internet access and use. In particular, different
approaches to basic IT skills acquisition emerged and lead to diverse
usage levels. In fact, about one fourth of the population considered in
2004 presented advanced user behavior; another fourth was
characterized as basic users; the remaining 50% made sporadic use
of the internet or did not use it at all. Moreover, the analysis carried
out over the following 4-year period depicted the presence of a
polarization process of internet use between non/sporadic users and
advanced users. Taking into consideration that internet use is
fundamental for individual and community development, national
and local policy makers could direct part of their efforts to offset this
usage polarization. In order to do so, understanding how people
approach technology and the different paths leading to the acquisition
of the necessary IT skills represents a fundamental aspect.
In this respect, the digital divide user typologies proposed in this
paper constitutes a useful interpretation tool. In fact, in addition to
highlighting that informal and self-learning is at least as important as
formal face-to-face training courses in the process of basic IT skills
acquisition, it identifies three main user profiles having significantly
different needs in terms of policy support. While policy makers may
not need to be very concerned about athlete users, they should pay
greater attention to the laidback and needy user categories. If the
assumption is that internet use is intrinsically beneficial, and that
more mature use may be fostered among the laidback group through a
“carrot and stick” approach; the question becomes ‘what are the
incentives?’ Therefore, possible policy levers could create either the
Fig. 8. Education and income characteristics by user types.
Fig. 9. Employment characteristics by user types.
Table 3
Characteristics of user typologies.
Independent variables Coefficient values (t-statistics)
Constant 1,249*** (3,265)
Age −0,008*** (−5,011)
Gender (male= 1) 0,117*** (3,936)
Education 0,115*** (4,619)
Income 0,073*** (4,682)
Occupation (employed= 1) 0,238 (1,395)
Occupation (unemployed= 1) 0,212 (1,144)
Occupation (student= 1) 0,321* (1,766)
Occupation (other= 1) 0,081 (0,467)
Household size −0,048*** (−3,027)
Foreign language 0,106*** (2,919)
Location (town= 1) 0,015 (0,474)
Location (city= 1) 0,076 (1,197)
R2 0,639
Adjusted R2 0,635
F-statistics 154,261
Note: T-statistics are in parentheses under coefficient values. Those coefficients
followed by * are significant at the 10% level; those followed by ** are significant at
the 5% level; and those followed by *** are significant at the 1% level.
E. Ferro et al. / Government Information Quarterly 28 (2011) 3–10 9
right incentives for use or make technological use a necessary
complementary asset to other activities (i.e., school/work). The
complementary nature of computer use is supported by the fact
that literacy is becoming more important than numeracy and digital
skills in the explanation of internet use (Van Dijk & Hacker, 2003). A
priority for the neediest group, instead, is participating in formal
training courses that provide computer access and skills to overcome
the first step present in the process of IT skill acquisition (depicted as a
staircase in the proposed metaphor). Such first step could also be
lowered by designing more friendly and easy-to-use information
systems that minimize the need for anything but the most basic of IT
skills in order to produce significant benefits. To a certain extent, the
ease of use of most IT systems has been enhanced over the years;
nevertheless, the considerable portion of the population represented
by non-users shows the presence of a significant room for further
improvement in this respect.
In conclusion, a careful and close management of the evolution of
digital gaps by policy-makers seems to be desirable and necessary. At
the same time, attention should be paid toward avoiding technological
deterministic approaches aimed at fostering technology adoption
and use per se. Rather, the use of technology should be advocated as an
important enabling tool that can support individuals in their everyday
activities—production, social, political, consumption, savings activities
(Selwyn, 2003). Hence, this should translate to public policies framing
the problem from a multitude of perspectives and fostering the
diffusion of IT as well as important complementary skills.
A potential limitation of the present study is the limited
geographical area considered. However, we are convinced that it is
a useful starting point. First, digital divide is best understood,
managed, and tackled in context. More and more, the public debate
is moving toward a European discourse where regions are considered
the best unit of analysis (in terms of homogeneity) in the discussion of
strategic issues having to do with the Information Society (European
Commission, 2006). Second, it is our belief that even if wider
geographical areas had been considered, the generalization of results
could not have been taken for granted in exactly the same way. As a
matter of fact, findings from studies conducted in China or Asia most
likely may not be generalized to USA, Europe, or Latin America due to
the high level of heterogeneity present among the different contexts
considered. We thus propose to take the results of this study for what
they are: food for thought that may spark interesting reflections and
discussions, and that may be taken up by other researchers and
adopted in different contexts in order to advance the current
understanding of a complex and dynamic phenomenon.
There are important opportunities for research in this area. Future
research may focus on testing the validity of the model proposed for
advanced IT skills also (i.e. programming languages, statistical
packages, etc.). In addition, multivariate analyses would be required
to strengthen the reliability of the user types' profiles. Finally, agentbased
and system dynamics simulation models could be used for
testing alternative policy solutions as well as understanding the role
of the interaction among the different groups of users.
References
Adriani, F., & Becchetti, L. (2003). Does the digital divide matter? The role of ICT in crosscountry
level and growth estimates. CEIS Tor Vergata.
Bawden, D. (2008). Origins and concepts of digital literacy. In C. Lankshear, & M. Knobel
(Eds.), Digital literacies: Concepts, policies and practices (pp. 15−32). New York, NY:
Peter Lang.
Bélanger, F., & Carter, L. (2009, Aprill). The impact of the digital divide on e-government
use. Communications of the ACM, 52(4), 132−135.
Castells, M. (2001). The internet galaxy. Reflections on the internet, business, and society.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Compaine, B. (2001). Re-examining the digital divide: Internet and telecom consortium.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Dewan, S., & Riggins, F. J. (2005). The digital divide: Current and future research
directions. Journal of Association for Information Systems, 6(2), 298−337.
Dholakia, R. (2006). Gender and IT in the household: Evolving patterns of internet use
in the United States. The Information Society, 22, 231−240.
Drori, G. S., & Jang, Y. S. (2003). The global digital divide: A sociological assessment of
trends and causes. Social Science Computer Review, 21(2), 144−161.
European Commission (2006). Information society and the regions: Linking European
policies. Retrieved from http://ec.europa.eu/information_society/newsroom/cf/
itemlongdetail.cfm?item_id=3306
Eurostat (2006). E-skills of individuals and ICT competence in enterprises. Way of
obtaining e-skills table, Eurostat Web Database. Retrieved from http://appsso.
eurostat.ec.europa.eu/nui/show.do?dataset=isoc_sk_how_i&lang=en
Ferro, E., Gil-Garcia, J. R., & Helbig, N. (2008). Digital divide and broadband access: The
case of an Italian region. In Y. K. Dwivedi, A. Papazafeiropoulou, & J. Choudrie (Eds.),
Handbook of research on global diffusion of broadband data transmission
(pp. 160−176). : Information Science Reference, IGI Global.
Ferro, E., Dwivedi, Y. K., Gil-Garcia, J. R., & Williams, M. D. (Eds.). (2009). Handbook of
research on overcoming digital divides: Constructing an equitable and competitive
information society. Hershey, PA: IGI Global, Information Science Reference.
Gil-Garcia, J. R., Ferro, E., & Helbig, N. (2006). Is it only about Internet access? An
empirical test of a multi-dimensional digital divide. In M. Wimmer, H. J. Scholl, Å.
Grönlund, & K. Viborg Andersen (Eds.), Lecture Notes in Computer Science, No. 4084.
Proceedings of 5th International on Electronic Government (pp. 139−149). Berlin,
Germany: Springer-Verlag.
Hargittai, E. (2010). Digital na(t)ives? Variation in Internet skills and uses among
members of the “Net Generation”. Sociological Inquiry, 80(1), 92−113.
Hargittai, E. (2009). An update on survey measures of web-oriented digital literacy.
Social Science Computer Review, 27(1), 130−137.
Hargittai, E. (2002a). Second-level digital divide: Differences in people's online skills.
First Monday, 7(4) Retrieved from: http://firstmonday.org/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/
index.php/fm/issue/view/144
Hargittai, E. (2002b). Beyond logs and surveys: In-depth measures of people's web use
skills. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 53(14),
1239−1244.
Hargittai, E., & Hinnant, A. (2008). Digital inequality: Differences in young adults' use of
the Internet. Communication Research, 35(5), 602−621.
Helbig, N., Gil-Garcia, J. R., & Ferro, E. (2009). Understanding the complexity of
electronic government: Implications from the digital divide literature. Government
Information Quarterly, 26(1), 89−97.
Hines, A. H., Nelson, A., & Tu, T. L. N. (2001). Hidden circuits. In A. Nelson, T. L. N. Tu, & A.
H. Hines (Eds.), Technicolor (pp. 5). New York: New York University Press.
Kennedy, T., Wellman, B., & Klement, K. (2003). Gendering the digital divide. IT &
Society, 1(5), 72−96.
Norris, P. (2001). Digital divide: Civic engagement, information poverty, and the internet
worldwide. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Mossberger, K., Tolbert, C. J., & Stansbury, M. (2003). Virtual inequality: Beyond the
digital divide. Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press.
Rogers, E. M. (1962). Diffusion of innovations. New York: The Free Press.
Selwyn, N. (2003). Defining the ‘digital divide’: Developing a theoretical understanding of
inequalities in the information age. Occasional Paper: Cardiff University.
Selwyn, N. (2005). The social processes of learning to use computers. Social Science
Computer Review, 23(1), 122−135.
Servon, L. J. (2002). Bridging the digital divide: Technology, community, and public policy.
Oxford: Blackwell Publishers Ltd..
Van Dijk, J. (1999). The network society, social aspects of new media. Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage.
Van Dijk, I., & Hacker, K. (2003). The digital divide as a complex dynamic phenomenon.
International Journal of Information Society, 19, 315−326.
Van Dijk, J. (2005). The deepening divide, inequality in the information society. Thousand
Oaks, London, New Delhi: Sage Publications.
Van Dijk, J., & Van Deursen, A. (2009). Inequalities of digital skills and how to overcome
them. In E. Ferro, Y. K. Dwivedi, J. R. Gil-Garcia, & M. D. Williams (Eds.), Handbook of
research on overcoming digital divides: Constructing an equitable and competitive
information society (pp. 278−291). Hershey, PA: IGI Global, Information Science
Reference.
Vehovar, V., Sicherl, P., Husing, T., & Dolnicar, V. (2006). Methodological challenges of
digital divide measurements. International Journal of Information Society, 22,
279−290.
Warf, B. (2001). Segueways into cyberspace: Multiple geographies of the digital divide.
Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design, 28, 3−19.
Warschauer, M. (2003). Technology and social inclusion: Rethinking the digital divide.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Wills, M. (1999). Bridging the digital divide.December: Adults Learning 10–11.
