Complicated Women: Examining
Methodologies for Understanding the
Uses of Technology
PAMELA TAKAYOSHI
University of Louisville
In this article, I call for more complicated understandings of the relationship between women
and technology, arguing that two interpretive frameworks interfere with our current representations
of women and technology: a reliance on what Paul V. Anderson (1998) has called
“person-based research” (p. 63) and an either/or framework for thinking about technology.
Recent scholarship is firmly grounded in an awareness that technologies are always ideological,
that technologies can be used to both oppressive and empowering ends, and that
disempowered groups are more likely to be oppressed than empowered by technologies.
Although composition has developed a complicated understanding of the ideologies of
technology, we have not focused our attention in a systematic way on the perhaps unique
relationship of women and technology. I draw on feminist technology theorists’ constructions
of technology as always ideological but never predetermined in its meanings for users as a
way of beginning this project.
computer technologies feminist theory narratives research methodology women
Aerin appeared in an advanced, computer-based class of mine only through the urging of
her academic advisor. She resented technology. At the beginning of the course, I asked
students to articulate their own definitions of technology. In hers, Aerin emphasized the
impersonal nature of technology “which only works to separate us from other people and
from the world around us. . . they remove the personal element from human interaction. . .
I hope the current feminist work being done with technology will return some of its
humanity.” Although she had very little first-hand experience with computer technologies,
Aerin came into the course fully embracing a subject position that featured many
dominant cultural beliefs about women and technology.
A 1994 Newsweek story by Barbara Kantrowitz about gender and computers shares
some of the cultural beliefs Aerin held when she began the class. In the article, the Internet
is characterized as a place where women are not welcomed, and, thus, must establish their
Direct all correspondence to: Pamela Takayoshi, Department of English, University of Louisville, 315 Humanities
Building, Louisville, KY 40292. E-mail: ,pdtaka01@athena.louisville.edu..
Computers and Composition 17, 123–138 (2000) ISSN 8755-4615
© 2000 Elsevier Science Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.
123
own “all women” spaces to reap the potential benefits of online communications.
Kantrowitz (1994) wrote that “in general, computer culture is created, defined, and
controlled by men. Women often feel as welcome as a system crash” (p. 50). Although she
acknowledged that there are male and female exceptions to this generalization, Kantrowitz
focused on establishing the fact that the gender gap has been carried into this new medium,
a gap she viewed as based in large part on the inability of computer culture to respond to
women’s nurturing, caring, relational sides. A “Sylvia” cartoon accompanying the article
sums up the article’s message: a girl standing with her arms on either side of her computer
(with an image of a cat on the monitor) says “My friends and I are teaching dolphins to
communicate through email” whereas the boy to her left, standing with arms crossed in
front of a computer (with an image of an alien and spaceship on the monitor), says “I like
to blow stuff up.”
Kantrowitz’s (1994) article encapsulates several essentializing cultural narratives about
gender and technology—including narratives of women as caring, nurturing beings
interested in love, animals, and interpersonal relationships; of men as aggressive, macho
conquerors of the universe; and of computer culture as imbued with masculine values of
sterility, logic, and impersonality. In this way, the article serves as a good example of the
way traditional definitions of male and female, masculine and feminine are imbricated in
popular narratives of computers. Although Kantrowitz’s article serves as a good example
of the gendering of computers in our cultural consciousness, it does little to disrupt these
gendered constructions. Kantrowitz constructed computers and traditional gender roles as
fixed and stable.
Aerin’s experience, however, was more complicated than Kantrowitz’s (1994) discussion
would lead us to understand. At the beginning of the class, Aerin saw little appeal in
what she perceived as the alienating, masculinist, and totally foreign world of computers.
However, as Aerin explored the Internet and the World Wide Web for the first time to
connect with others in intensely personal ways, her own ideologies of technology had to
be revised. Through her own experience of computer technologies, Aerin found that
technology was not the masculinist, impersonal world she had read about and heard about.
At the same time, she did not totally abandon her desire for personal connection or her
frustration with the machinery of computers. Instead, she revised the ideologies of
computers to better fit with those feelings—she telephoned people she met online, she
uploaded pictures of herself onto her Web page so that online friends could put a face with
her online presence, she personalized her home page1 to reflect what she saw as her
feminine values rather than the masculine values of Web culture, and she still wished for
machines that were better (at connecting people and at creating the spaces she wanted to
experience online). Further, Aerin’s active use of technology suggests that women’s
experiences are not seamless and coherent, all negative or all positive. It suggests that for
women to be comfortable in this virtual terrain, they need to understand their own sense
of boundaries; recognize that experience is conflicted and contested; and, understanding
negative experiences as part of the fabric of online communication, persevere.
Within the composition scholarship on computers, this complicated and sometimes
contradictory relationship between women and technology has not been fully articulated.
1 Required of all students in the course.
124 TAKAYOSHI
In an article published in 1991, Emily Jessup wrote that “the research on feminism and
computers in composition instruction completed to date has focused on two central
areas—the potential of computers to subvert traditional hierarchies and to enfranchise
diverse populations of learners, and on different attitudes among actual computer users”
(Jessup, 1991, p. 345). Since that time, research on computers for composition instruction
has moved away from an accepted optimism to a more critical stance. Theorists of
computers in composition instruction have increasingly interrogated the failure of computers
to create the communities and enfranchising structures that were theorized as
possible for female students in particular. Jessup’s article coincides with Gail Hawisher
and Cynthia Selfe’s (1991) identification of a “rhetoric of technology” that is primarily
optimistic, hopeful, and enthusiastic. This rhetoric, “positive in the sense that it reflects the
high expectations of instructors committed to positive educational reform in their writing
classes” (p. 57), does not incorporate a critical vision of computers in composition
classrooms. Composition scholars have answered Hawisher and Selfe’s call for more
critical examinations of writing technologies by describing the limitations of computers
and their inability to automatically bring about the hoped-for positive educational reform
and empowerment of users. Still, very few studies focus specifically on women users. The
vast body of feminist scholarship on technologies that exists outside composition studies
suggests that composition studies might benefit a great deal by trying to understand the
unique relationship women might experience with technology. Rather than providing the
field with “a full understanding of how the use of technology can affect the social,
political, and educational environments within which we teach” (Hawisher & Selfe, 1991,
p. 64), the stories we’ve told in composition studies that do consider women in particular
as users have notably focused on technology’s tendencies toward supporting gender
oppression. Rather than offering complex, complicated understandings of how women
negotiate virtual communications, the existing scholarship has created an alternate,
although still coherent, vision of women and technology—one in which women are not
empowered and uplifted by technology’s potentials for rewriting cultural attitudes and
beliefs. Instead, technology is used in support of the marginalizing, oppressive forces of
a patriarchal culture. Neither of these kinds of stories explains Aerin’s experiences with
online communications.
In this article, I call for more protean constructions and understandings of the relationship
between women and technology, arguing that two interpretive frameworks
interfere with more complicated representations of women using technology—a reliance
on what Paul V. Anderson (1998) has called “person-based research” (p. 63) and an
either/or framework for thinking about technology. Recent scholarship is firmly grounded
in an awareness that technologies are always ideological, that technologies can be used to
both oppressive and empowering ends, and that disempowered groups are more likely to
be oppressed than empowered by technologies. When considered together, however, the
narratives we’ve told about women and technology tend to create coherent, although
competing, visions of technology as either good or bad. Disentangling this knot involves
first complicating the reliance in our scholarship on teacher-narrated, person-based research,
pointing to the ways this methodological choice constrains what it is we can know
about users’ relationships to technology. Once that knot has been untangled, I turn to the
limitations of either/or thinking about technology, drawing on feminist technology theorists’
constructions of technology as always ideological but never predetermined in its
Complicated Women 125
meanings for users. Unknotting these two different, yet related, problems suggests new
methodological approaches to understanding women and technology. I believe we can
disentangle ourselves from the limits these interpretive frameworks place on our understanding
of women and technology, and more importantly, our understanding of the
relationships among all students and the technologies that continue to infuse our writing
curriculum and shape our writing theories.
THE PROBLEMS OF INTERPRETATION IN PERSON-BASED
RESEARCH ON WOMEN AND TECHNOLOGY
Earlier computers and composition scholarship hoped that computer technologies would
offer alternatives to the oppressive classroom structures that women in particular experienced
(Flores, 1990; Selfe, 1990). Recent scholarship in computers and composition has
moved toward a more fully articulated vision of the ideological limits of computer
technologies. This critically conscious scholarship has attempted to redress the earlier
vision of computers as inherently positive and empowering for students and teachers by
offering different narratives that counter those positive claims. Tracing the evolution of
this critical shift in the scholarship on computers and composition reveals the extent to
which composition studies has taken very seriously Gail Hawisher and Cynthia Selfe’s
(1991) assertion that “we can no longer afford simply, and only, to dwell on the best parts,
to tell stories about the best classroom moments” (p. 61). Stories of the best parts of the
best classroom moments have been supplemented with stories about less-satisfying
classroom moments: narratives of victims oppressed by computers used as tools of
surveillance (Janangelo, 1991), harassment (George, 1989; Kremers, 1988; Regan, 1993;
Takayoshi, 1994), and erasure of cultural and sexual identity (Regan, 1993; Romano,
1993).
Joseph Janangelo’s (1991) story of Ella is a powerful example of narratives of women
online. Other studies that have built theories upon narratives drawn from the teacher’s own
experience include Marilyn Cooper and Selfe (1990), Lester Faigley (1992), Marion Fey
(1994), E. Laurie George (1989), Joyce Kinkead (1987), Alison Regan (1993), Susan
Romano (1993), Delores Schriner and William Rice (1989), and Takayoshi (1994). I focus
on Janangelo’s discussion of Ella because it is a good site for examining the problems of
interpretation that arise in teacher-told, person-based narratives not part of a larger,
systematic, and planned study. It is also a vividly memorable example of how technology
can be used against women.2 I rely on Janangelo’s story of Ella to closely read the way
person-based narrative functions in our discourse about women and technology and, further,
to build from that discussion a different conception for methodology in computers and
composition scholarship. Ultimately, then, this discussion does not discount or dismiss the
significance of any of the studies that rely on the researcher’s own interpretations of her
2 I have students in my graduate seminar on computers and composition and in the new teacher
orientation for teaching in my department’s computer classroom read this article. The example of
Ella is a profoundly disturbing one that generates a great deal of discussion, reflection, and
motivation for action. Students and teachers regularly ask “What can I do to ensure that something
like this never happens in my classroom? What can be done to ensure that technology does not work
against any student in this way?”
126 TAKAYOSHI
own classroom. Rather, it should demonstrate the problems in limiting ourselves to this
kind of representation of ourselves and the students in the classes we teach.
A first-year college student who had recently moved to the United States from the
Soviet Union, Ella openly disapproved of the values of her American classmates, which
fueled the other students’ hostility toward her. On the class conference (an electronic
writing space where students communicated with one another), someone anonymously
changed a posting so that it read “Ella sucks.” The postings that followed built upon the
sentence in increasingly crude ways, with the word “sucks” ultimately being replaced with
“fucks” and a reference to Ella’s father. Janangelo reported that “When that structure
became a bore, it was changed to ‘Ella is a. . . ,’ and words such as ‘cunt,’ ‘slut,’ ‘pig,’
and ‘Commie bitch’ were added” (p. 58). Ella’s peers gendered her, constructing her as
a sexually active and deviant woman and reducing her to the sum total of her genitalia.
Janangelo, the teacher as well as the narrator, did not describe what role he played as this
event took place. Rather, he suggested that he stayed out of the fray: “I explained to my
students that their bulletin board would be a nonacademic space where they could
exchange ideas freely. My students had decided that I should be a read-only conference
participant” (Janangelo, 1991, p. 57).
Ella’s narrative is a deeply disturbing instance of online communications technology
that jars us loose from any conception that technology is not ideological or cannot be put
to strongly ideological uses. It is a situation that screams for immediate consideration by
teachers and theorists of technological communications—we clearly cannot ignore either
Ella’s individual experience or the need for theoretical frameworks to help us understand
what happened as a way of avoiding it again. Janangelo’s narrative, situated within the
more critical scholarship Hawisher and Selfe (1991) called for, clearly contributes to a
more complex understanding of technology as neither completely positive nor completely
negative. However, as in this example, many of the claims made about computer
technologies within the critical discourse share with the earlier positive rhetoric a reliance
on classroom stories. Both the positive and the negative stories in computers and
composition are largely “person-based research [that] includes the publications and
presentations in which we describe people we’ve encountered in the normal course of our
professional and personal lives, outside of formally planned investigations” (Anderson,
1998, p. 63). Although Anderson is concerned with our profession’s collective lack of
discussion of the ethics of person-based research, his description of person-based research
as “outside of formally planned investigations” is an important one for my discussion here.
Computers and composition scholarship has relied on these teacher narratives as a
methodology for gaining insight about a wide-range of pedagogical and theoretical issues,
and it has been an important and valid way of knowing and understanding experience.
Still, there are limits to this way of knowing. Hawisher and Selfe (1991) attributed the lack
of a complex understanding about technology to a reliance on positive stories about
technology, but maybe the problem of complexity lies not in the overwhelming positive
nature of the stories but in a reliance on stories themselves. Maybe the debilitating factor
is not the quality of the stories (negative or positive) but on the nature of narrative as a
primary research methodology. Narrative is only one among many other ways of building
knowledge, and it is a methodology that carries with it special difficulties. At this
historical moment in our scholarship, as the positive stories of technology are supplemented
with a recognition of the negative aspects of technology, an awareness of the
Complicated Women 127
limitations of narrative as a methodology might move us to explore new questions and
new areas of concern in technology studies.
Research methodologists in composition studies have suggested the difficulties in
interpretation that arise when we rely too heavily on narrative as a methodological stance.
Teacher-told, person-based narratives assume several interpretive stances: that the teacher
has an accurate picture of what happens in the classroom, that there is one interpretation
that makes more sense than other possible interpretations, that students represent themselves
to teachers honestly and unselfconsciously (without constructing “student” personae),
and that teachers’ subject positions (that might vary significantly from students’ race,
class, gender, generational, sexual orientation, and body image positions) do not complicate
interpretation. Many of the stories we tell in computers and composition scholarship,
examples of either positive or negative experiences with technology, are told as relatively
coherent renderings from the teacher’s perspective. In Janangelo’s rendering of Ella’s
experience, for example, his interpretation of the events (an interpretation of an outsider,
given that he did not participate in the discussion) is privileged whereas the voices of those
who engaged in the discussion (including Ella) are not included. He is the teacher,
selecting this particular instance from innumerable other occurrences that might have
taken place in that semester. Recognizing that “those who turn other people’s lives into
texts hold real power” (p. 14), Thomas Newkirk (1996) has argued that researchers have
an ethical responsibility to complicate their interpretations of events by granting the
researched “the opportunity to respond to problematical situations” and “offer counterinterpretations
or provide mitigating information” (p. 13). These mediating forms of
information can destabilize the coherent and uncontested appearance of interpretation, and
in this way, underscore that the interpretation (and the events themselves) are constructions
of meaning.
Ultimately, these questions of interpretation are questions of power. Patrick Hartwell
(1987) has argued that the role of narrator has often been available only to teachers and
researchers, not to students. Citing Cazden and Hymes, he pointed out that “only the
teacher has narrative rights. . . . We can tell stories, but our students can’t” (p. 14). This
narrative right becomes an issue of power when the teacher becomes the researcher,
scholar, published author. Moving through these channels, the interpretation gains institutional
authority as it passes refereed review, becomes accepted as scholarship, and enters
the body of a discipline’s received knowledge.
Feminist research methodologists assert that interpretation is an issue of power by
exploring the relationship between researcher and researched. Some feminist theorists
suggest that discussions of power have been difficult to foreground in feminist circles
because “there is a profound ambivalence about power in feminist theory. . . feminists
have often relied upon a characterization of power as something evil, dangerous, and
corrupting” (Kitzinger, 1991, p. 113). In composition studies, a similar discourse exists
about the assertion of power in the classroom. But to ignore issues of power is to
disengage rather than develop more enriching and potentially beneficial understandings of
power. For this reason, feminist methodologists have attacked the issue of power in
interpretation head-on: “In feminist research, at the very least, both [researcher and
researched] are to be regarded as having the same status: as participants or collaborators
in the same enterprise” (Wilkinson, 1986, p. 13). Sue Wilkinson (1986) identified a key
component of feminist research as “its reflexive and self-reflective quality. . . in which the
128 TAKAYOSHI
knower is part of the matrix of what is known” (p. 13). Several questions arise from these
suggestions about the shape of methodology. When we are presented with a narrative of
an individual woman’s experiences with technology, we might ask: How would we
interpret the story if we were given multiple versions of it, competing versions out of
which a contested, rather than a coherent, impression might arise? How representative is
the individual’s experience for female computer users? What were the experiences of the
other women in the class? What were the other experiences of the student?
Many stories about technology told in composition studies are anecdotal narratives of
an individual student’s experience with technology, chosen from a semester’s worth of
stories that were not picked. As Newkirk (1996) argued, “What we often have is research
as advocacy, a selectively chosen sample of the most convincing examples of student
success” (p. 12). Although our stories might not always indicate student success, they are
often selected because they are the stories that most exemplify the point we set out to
make. What about the stories that we accrue over a semester that don’t fit with our
conclusions? What might those stories tell us about the conclusions we’ve already made
in our minds? Reflecting on the ethics of interpretation, Gesa Kirsch and Joy Ritchie
(1995) suggested that researchers “need to recognize the impossibility of ever fully
understanding another’s experiences and to question their motives in gathering, selecting,
and presenting these stories” (p. 13). The motivation for selecting the stories we’ve told
in computers and composition has not been foregrounded in the scholarship. Although we
expect empirical researchers to rest their claims on actual data they’ve collected systematically,
we are less likely to hold narrative claims to similar standards. Why was the
narrative chosen out of all the possible narratives? Was it representative of many students’
experiences, or was it such a strikingly discordant feature of the classroom life that it stood
out? Answers to these questions suggest how differently we might interpret stories of
classroom moments. We might understand and give weight to representative stories in
very different ways than we do strikingly discordant ones. Without a recognition of where
the story fits within the context of the classroom life (or the Listserv activity, or the
professional discourse), the risk is that the unusual or uncommon experience becomes
representative of the everyday. This meaning-making dynamic is particularly important to
think about with regards to stories we’ve told about women and technology.3
I am particularly curious about the fact that our stories of women and technology tend
3 The experience of Aerin, the student I began this paper with, suggests the limits of an uncontested
interpretation. Aerin once told the class that the first thing that happened when she logged onto
LambdaMOO was that male characters asked her to have sex with them in a private chat room.
Several of the students, connecting Aerin’s experience to course readings, were outraged. Aerin was
nonplussed. She told the class, “I just say ‘no, thanks,’ and look for some friends to talk to.” Aerin’s
response to a seemingly oppressive situation was quite different than the response her peers expected
and than the way such a narrative might be constructed about her. Aerin’s classmates and I “read”
her being approached for virtual sex through our own interpretive lenses, and in that movement,
missed how Aerin herself saw the events. Without asking her how she read the events, we might
have felt comfortable in our belief that Aerin would see the events the same way we did—as another
instance of women’s oppression. Aerin, though, as a participant in the culture, did not see it as
thoroughly gendered because she knew that on this MOO, everyone—male or female presenting—
was immediately approached for virtual sex the minute they logged in.
Complicated Women 129
to be ones in which women are belittled, oppressed, silenced. Although computers and
composition has moved beyond the binary position of treating technology as either
positive or negative, why have the stories about women using computer technologies been
chosen? Are the negative experiences representative of women’s experiences as a whole
with technology, or are they extreme examples that don’t fit the experience of the majority
of women? Why are we not looking as a field at more empowering instances of women
using technology as a way for understanding the protean nature of the relationships
women affect toward technology? Why are women in the stories often object of study
rather than subject of action? This issue of agency becomes a significant one in the face
of essentializing cultural constructions of women and computers such as those represented
in Kantrowitz’s (1994) Newsweek article—such constructions of powerlessness and lack
of agency reinscribe patriarchal constructions of “woman” that feminists have battled for
years. In a patriarchal culture that all too often ignores or does not care about the
oppression of women and children, the mere existence of negative stories might subvert
dominant ideologies that relegate women and children to marginal status in systems of
power. Laura Miller (1995) argued that these disturbing stories are not disruptive to
cultural systems of power, though, and only reinforce ideologies of women as weaker and
dependent on the good will of patriarchy to protect them. Miller (1995) warned that
women, who have the right to expect rigorous prosecution of crimes committed against
them, should nevertheless be suspicious of a desire for special protections:
Based as it is on the idea that women are inherently weak and incapable of self-defense and that
men are innately predatory, it actually reinforces the power imbalance between the sexes, with its
roots in the concept of women as property, constantly under siege and requiring the vigilant
protection of their male owners. (p. 53)
Not only does the call for special protections rely on a patriarchal conception of women
as weak, fragile, and incapable of protecting themselves, it also implicitly reinforces an
essentialist vision of women as a quantifiable class sharing similar experiences, beliefs,
and world views and perpetuates a vision of subjectivity as coherent, singular, and
cohesive, rather than contested, conflicted, and in continual flux.
Some recent feminist work in computers and composition complicates these traditional
categories of “woman” (as a coherent, unconflicted subject) and “women” (as a homogenous
group). Although for the most part our scholarship has not complicated these
categories, two studies suggest how complicated the relationship between women and
technology really is and the direction future research might take in developing more
complicated and systematic pictures of women and technology. Nancy Kaplan and Eva
Farrell (1994) have painted a “portrait of young women on the net” (online), that depicts
the persistence of women in the apparently hostile culture of computer networks. Recognizing
that most studies involving women and networking “serve to confirm anecdotal
evidence [that] women frequently feel ignored, silenced, even abused in electronic
conversations” (online), Kaplan and Farrell (1994) explored, through a study of one group
of young female users of technology, why some women persist despite the barriers and
negative experiences they may face. In response to anecdotal evidence, Kaplan and Farrell
systematically studied the lives of these young women online, telling their stories within
the context of their relationships with one another and with technology in their lives as a
whole. Kaplan and Farrell (1994) argued that it is important for theorists to understand
130 TAKAYOSHI
why some women like computer networks if we are to construct opportunities that engage
women in electronic communications. To answer that question, Kaplan and Farrell turned
to the women themselves, complicating the interpretive lens by relying not only on the
researcher’s interpretation of the events. Indeed, the identities of the authors suggest one
way of mediating the problems of interpretation pointed to by Newkirk (1996), Kirsch and
Ritchie (1995), and others by blurring the line between researcher and researched—
Kaplan (a composition scholar) and Farrell (Kaplan’s daughter and a member of the group
of women studied) wrote the article together. Similarly, Pamela Takayoshi, Emily Huot,
and Meghan Huot (1999) (a composition scholar and her two teenage step-daughters,
respectively) have worked to incorporate the voices of the researched into the scholarship.
They explain,
The collaborative nature of this article underscores the importance of listening to girls’ voices as
they articulate their negotiation of these technological spaces. In answering Kaplan and Farrell’s
call to understanding “what attracts some women to electronic environments and what features of
the activities we engage in sustain us in these new spaces,” we must turn to the women
themselves. (p. 91)
This awareness of and explicit concern for constructing engaging practices and listening
to the women and girls using technology is vitally important at this historical moment if
women are to have any voice regarding technology’s future shape and role in our society.
In another study that moves beyond anecdotal, person-based narrative, Hawisher and
Patricia Sullivan (1998) warned that “feminists must harness the new technologies to
serve their own just political and social goals” (p. 195). In their study of one all-woman
Listserv, Hawisher and Sullivan (1998) argued that harnessing acts are possible and were
visible in the group of women they studied. These harnessing acts—attempts by women
to create an “e-space of their own”—reflected the varying experiences of the women on
the Listserv; indeed, one important finding of the study was the heterogeneity of women’s
experiences with the Listserv. The interpretive strategy of postmodern mapping that
Hawisher and Sullivan use to relate the women’s stories is a deliberate attempt to resist
a totalizing narrative: “The terrain of a particular site requires the multiple mappings of
time, space, and culture. Such varied and simultaneous mappings of e-space resist a
totalizing vision because of the many paradoxes at work in shaping electronic contexts”
(p. 178).
One strand of Listserv conversation that Hawisher and Sullivan (1998) analyzed dealt
with strategies the women developed for creating a space online despite the harassment
they experienced and the resistance they felt to their online presence. One woman
attempted to summarize the participants’ discussion of strategies as a “series of small,
continuous, potent gestures that say ‘You will not run my world the way you want to; I
will shape my life, too, in the ways that I want and can.’ This is one of the things I like
most about women—just because they’re not talking, doesn’t mean they’re not acting, and
acting effectively as agents of change” (Hawisher & Sullivan, 1998, p. 194). These studies
suggest that the relationship of women and technology is much more complicated than
being either negative or positive. The women in these studies persist in otherwise hostile
technological environments. Their experiences in actively assuming a productive (rather
than merely consumptive) role in carving out e-spaces of their own suggest the limits we
place on our understanding when we try to understand women’s relationship to technology
with reference to an either/or framework. What is interesting is that some women persist
Complicated Women 131
when negative things happen—and persist by creating their own responses and using
technology to support their own values.
Anecdotal narratives—those stories of classroom occurrences that scholars tell about
their own classrooms—are rich sources for thinking through pedagogical and theoretical
problems. Teacher-told, person-based narratives have helped computers and composition
specialists enter a discussion about women and technology—it was our observations of
women using technology and our own experiences with technology that led us to reflect
on the relationship thoughtfully and critically. When this reflective practice relies too
heavily on the narratives of individual users (being related by the users’ own teachers),
when conclusions are drawn from one instance to speak to the nature of women’s
relationship with technology, or when the narrative comes to stand for the nature of
women and technology rather than as a heuristic for further investigation, however, the
scholarship presents an unreliable picture of technology and, more seriously, limits how
we understand students’ negotiations of technology in our own classrooms.
MOVING OUTSIDE THE “EITHER/OR”: FEMINISM AND THE
AMBIGUITIES OF TECHNOLOGY
Within cultural conversations about technology—from advertisements to news magazine
cover stories—a common way of representing approaches to technology is by reference to
an either/or narrative structure: Technology is either good or bad. Communication
technologies, in particular, either help us stay informed or they overload us with too much
information; they either connect us with like-minded people or they allow harassers to
track us down; they either make us feel a part of something social or they alienate us. The
computers and composition discourse, situated as it is within this larger cultural system of
meaning, must work actively to complicate this either/or structure, which is so ubiquitous
as to seem natural. Indeed, rather than swinging back and forth between understanding
technologies as either positive or negative for women users, we might work toward a
balanced perspective that recognizes technology’s ability to be both at the same time. This
balanced perspective—one that accounts for and understands both negative and positive
experiences with technology—exists outside the dualism of optimistic and critical traditions.
The need for this balanced perspective can be seen in the case of women and
technology. Whereas narratives of women and technology have thus far fallen into one of
two camps—either positive or negative—what I am interested in constructing is a position
for future conceptions of women and technology that avoids this dualistic structure. The
position I am envisioning is one that articulates negative and positive experiences of
technology to form a more complex vision of technology. The balanced perspective might
consider technology as ideological, yet ambiguous, by borrowing at least three arguments
from feminist theories of technology: First, feminist theorists have articulated the shape
nondualistic thinking might give considerations of technology; second, feminist critiques
have articulated the possibilities for thinking of technology as ambiguous, particularly
within discussions of domestic and reproductive technologies; and third, the feminist
conception of women’s relationships with technology as ambiguous allows room for both
empowering and oppressive stories.
Cognizant of the ways women and women’s interests, work, and concerns have been
disempowered through their placement in a dualistic structure that consistently values the
132 TAKAYOSHI
masculine over the feminine, feminist theorists work to dismantle such cultural dualisms.
Donna Haraway (1985) identified the way that dualisms structure practices of domination:
certain dualisms have persisted in Western traditions; they have all been systematic to the logics
and practices of domination of women, people of color, nature, workers, animals—in short,
domination of all constituted as others, whose task is to mirror the self. Chief among these
troubling dualisms are self/other, mind/body, culture/nature, male/female. . . active/passive, right/
wrong, truth/illusion . . .“ (p. 219)
The dualistic structuring narrative in the Western tradition is reflected in the construction
of two opposing stories of technology: either women are encouraged through technology
to be more participatory and connected or women are oppressed and harassed by
technology. Haraway (1985) wrote that “high tech culture challenges these dualisms in
intriguing ways. It is not clear who makes and who is made in the relation between human
and machine” (p. 219). More than blurring the division between human and machine,
however, I see high tech culture as inscribing an additional dualism to the list Haraway
provides: technology/nature. Significantly, women are on the other side of the binary from
technology. They don’t fit. Stories that depict women in oppressive relationships with
technology resist techno-utopian conclusions, but they simultaneously enforce the separation
of women and computers. Stories that imply women will be harassed if they enter
the “masculinist” world of technology, where they do not rightfully have a place, function
to keep women from entering those spaces at all. The potential for this blurred relationship,
then, is mediated by stories that continue to inscribe women as either empowered or
oppressed by technologies.
In the same way that violence against women curtails female activity and the threat of
violence forces women to police themselves,4 stories of women and children harassed
online can function hegemonically to keep women and children from getting involved
with technology in the first place—which continues to ensure that online sites are
predominantly male. At the heart of this struggle is resistance to the role binaries will play
in our conceptions of computer technologies and the limits of those binaries. Feminist
critiques of technology offer one pathway out of this either/or by offering a theoretical
vision of technology use and design as ambiguous. A conception of technology as
ambiguous moves beyond a vision of technology as merely non-neutral and articulates the
ways technologies have always been positive and oppressive, oftentimes both at the same
time. Jan Zimmerman (1981) described this ambiguity of technology when she wrote
about women’s conflicted and contested position of power vis-a-vis reproductive technologies.
Whereas technologies such as artificial insemination, in vitro fertilization, birth
control, and abortion offer more options for women to use in controlling reproduction,
4 Of the policing function of patriarchy, Adrienne Rich has written that “the undermining of self, of
a woman’s sense of her right to occupy space and walk freely in the world, is deeply relevant to
education. . . . The capacity to think independently, to take intellectual risks, to assert ourselves
mentally, is inseparable from our physical way of being in the world, our feelings of personal
integrity. If it is dangerous for me to walk home late of an evening from the library, because I am
a woman and can be raped, how self possessed, how exuberant can I feel as I sit working in that
library? How much of my working energy is drained by the subliminal knowledge that, as a woman,
I test my physical right to exist each time I go out alone?” (p. 242).
Complicated Women 133
these technologies and others (such as amniocentesis) have at the same time allowed men
more control over women and their reproductive processes. Zimmerman wrote:
While such [reproductive] technologies may offer women freedom from childbearing, which has
been a form of female bondage, they also offer men an unprecedented opportunity to assert
control over the one aspect of the life process which has eluded them until now. In all other
aspects of health-care, mechanization and technology has resulted, intentionally or inadvertently,
in the destruction of female dominance over traditional female spheres of activity. (p. 364)
Women’s relationship to technology is not simple. In the face of technologies that allow
them more control over the shape their lives will take, what woman would discount the
positive potential technology offers her? In a separate discussion of household technologies,
Zimmerman asked: “How many working mothers have time to wash by hand? How
many mothers want a return to all-cotton, all-iron clothes? How many want a solar dryer
so they can hang out the clothes and bring them in?” (p. 362). What woman, in other
words, wants to (or can envision) renouncing technological developments (even problematic
ones) to return to pretechnological ways of living and working? Stephen Jay Gould
(1997) posed the same question in a slightly different way:
One overarching reason must lead us to prefer modern times to any past, whatever “golden age”
mythology we may be tempted to embrace: Thanks to medical knowledge and technology, almost
all of our children will grow up. Read the biography of any Victorian family, however privileged;
they all knew that a high percentage of their children would die. Whatever the psychological
defense mechanisms then in place (from religion to wet-nursing), I cannot imagine that the pain
of loss was any less then than now. This is the best of times—I only pray that we don’t misuse
technology to make it the worst. (p. 65)
These commentaries articulate that technology is not a simple case of either/or.
Technology is a non-neutral but also ambiguous entity. Relying on an understanding of
technology as non-neutral but ambiguous allows us to construct other lenses through
which to observe the interactions of students with computer technologies and through
which to think about the implications technology poses for existing and developing
theories of writing.
GATHERING DIFFERENT STORIES FROM
THESE DIFFERENT POSITIONS
Complicating the positions we take in telling women’s experiences and in understanding
technology suggests several avenues our research and scholarship might take. What
initially drew my thinking to this issue was my reflection as a teacher upon one student’s
experiences with technology. My interpretation of Aerin’s experiences was a heuristic for
me, and conversations with her about those experiences emphasized for me that existing
scholarship on women and technology and my own interpretations were limited in what
they could offer my understanding as a teacher and scholar. This became especially vivid
for me one day late in the semester, after Aerin had begun to forge a working relationship
with technology. She had developed a friendship with a male college student in another
part of the country. They spent hours talking in a MOO, wrote extended email messages
to each other, uploaded photos onto their respective Web pages so they could visualize a
face when they communicated online, and spoke on the phone with one another. After
several weeks of fairly intense communication, he revealed to her that he had been
134 TAKAYOSHI
conducting an online experiment into how personally revealing people would be online
with strangers. She had been the subject of his study. Although the instance upset Aerin
(she appeared in class simultaneously crying and raging moments after his revelation),
what is interesting is that her interest and fascination with computer-mediated communications
did not end there. Teacher-told narratives of classroom moments involving
women’s experiences with computer-mediated communications often end at just such a
moment, capturing only the moment where the woman has been upset, angered, “othered”
online.
What happens to the Ellas and Aerins in the weeks after their negative experiences? In
the weeks after her online involvement, Aerin’s feelings of betrayal and anger fueled her
growing awareness that computer-mediated communications should be put to better ends.
Armed with an understanding of the ideologies of computer technologies, Aerin started to
see the construction of computer-mediated communications as a clubhouse that was not
friendly to women. Having recognized in her own experience and in the course texts the
persistence of the gendering of computers and the effect of that gendering, Aerin
developed a resistant but active posture toward computer culture. In her journal, she
wrote: “The more women access the web, the more it will become a women-centered
space. In that it is just like any other system—the more women wrote literature, the more
literature reflected the concerns of women. So let’s get women on this thing! Activism—
the real tenet of feminism.” Being familiar with texts that identified and theorized the
oppressive means to which technology is often put with regards to women, Aerin did not
interpret the situation personally—her focus in the weeks after her involvement was not
on herself as an individual but on the way cultural assumptions about women as a group
informed the material practices of technology. I share this story cautiously, as an
indication of how my teacher narrative led me to question the value we give teacher-told,
person-based narratives in our scholarship. I’m not offering Aerin’s story as indicative of
anything about women’s relationship with technology—I offer it as a place for beginning
to think about our professional constructions of women and technology. Our existing
stories about women and technology don’t tell the whole story of many female computer
users.5 My thinking about Aerin has served as a heuristic for thinking about building
scholarship that sketches a more systematic and broad-reaching understanding of women
and technology.
The existing research on women and computers in composition classes does not
satisfactorily help me understand what happened to Aerin. It helps me interpret the less
than empowering aspects of her experiences with technology, but those interpretations are
ultimately at odds with Aerin’s perseverance in the face of those experiences. Clearly,
more complex pictures of users’ negotiations with technology are needed. How do users
5 Indeed, Lisa Gerrard (1997) suggested that although we seem to be carrying what we’ve always
done into new technological media (like the Internet and World Wide Web), “The computer gives
us new opportunities to be ourselves” (online). In describing the Web sites of women who actively
construct themselves online, she suggested an alternative to the story of technology dominating
women: “The sites of the other twenty-something women I’ve been analyzing lately [are] friendly,
witty, irreverent, and individual. I don’t know Jenni [the author of one site she examines], but my
guess is that technology hasn’t changed her: it’s merely given her a new tool for expressing, and
publicizing, her self” (online).
Complicated Women 135
understand and construct their own interactions with technology? What happens outside
our field of vision; that is, how do students negotiate difficult situations with computer
technologies outside our classrooms? How do our interpretations of students’ negotiations
differ from the students’ interpretation of the same events? Like Kaplan and Farrell
(1994), I believe that an exploration of why and how some women continue to use
computer technologies is an important part of understanding the potentials of computer
technologies for all students. How do women users enact agency in using technologies that
are constructed as and have been oppressive to women users? Answers to these kinds of
questions seem a necessary part of understanding both the complex relationship users
develop with computers and our role as computer-using educators in helping students
negotiate those relationships.
Composition studies now has a body of work that convincingly articulates the ideological
nature of computer technologies. Building upon that scholarship, we need to flesh
out the material forms and effects this ideological nature has on students, teaching, and the
nature of writing. The ideological nature of computers has been theorized and described
at a local level, with individual user’s experiences. What questions do those local studies
suggest for the shape of larger explorations? Thinking about individual student experiences
as a heuristic can suggest myriad new questions and focuses of study that might lead
us to the development of specific pedagogical strategies. Not algorithms for teaching with
technology, but something specific in terms of the kinds of larger patterns we can see
emerging from users’ experiences with technology. Our work with individual students has
led us to understand much about the nature of technology in writing classrooms. We now
need to broaden our focus with the intention of developing an awareness of larger patterns
of use.
The nature of technology, as it is experienced by many users, lies somewhere in the
conjunction between the good aspects and the bad tendencies. As Randi Markussen (1995)
has argued, “Optimism and pessimism about technology often share the same basic
assumptions, but we tend to evaluate them differently” (p. 162). Underlying both the
optimistic and the critical rhetorics of technology lies a faith that technology can be made
to support our pedagogical and theoretical goals—a faith that is necessary in working to
weave writing technologies into the fabrics of our classrooms. Increasingly, writing
theorists cannot ignore the ways that these technologies are woven into the fabric of
writing across our culture. Drawing these connections (between the optimistic and the
critical rhetorics) may reveal the intrinsic motivations of composition studies to get
involved in these discussions.
Ultimately, I tell Aerin’s story as a way of suggesting the limits we impose on our
understanding when we rely solely on our own interpretations of the experiences our
students have with technology. Aerin’s story, too, is incomplete. In writing this article, I
have shared with Aerin my interpretation of the events. Her responses (that are sometimes
slightly different versions than mine) and my interpretation of those responses shaped the
way I present her experiences. Still, my representation of her story seems seamless and
coherent. This is the danger of the narrative of the classroom moment, which is really only
one interpretation among many, one possibility among many. Her story—and my telling
of it—suggest that composition studies needs at this historical moment to develop a more
systematic and rigorous understanding of the role of teacher-told, person-based narratives
and the meanings of technology if we are to advance our understanding of the effects of
136 TAKAYOSHI
technology on curriculum, students, writing, and the teaching of writing. As scholars
examine ethical questions regarding representation, teacher–researchers might shift their
perspective, listen to students’ narratives of the events, and explore student interpretations
of the events. This shift would allow composition scholarship to begin with narrative as
a heuristic that suggests several avenues for further systematic exploration and investigation.
Relying on narrative as heuristic recognizes the centrality of narrative in human
understanding and knowledge-building while avoiding the reification of narrative as
Truth. In making these arguments, I am not dismissing the importance of narrative in
understanding, but I am arguing that narratives be used in different ways. We need to build
on narrative as a place to begin research rather than narrative as the primary research tool
itself. Focusing on individual students and situations has been a necessary and important
part of building a knowledge base, but larger questions have gone unanswered. Answers
to some questions might best be answered through more systematic studies: For example,
how and why do women become agents of change? How can my actions and theories as
a teacher using computer-mediated communications, as a theorist of electronic spaces,
support this moment? These questions—central to a feminist theory and practice—are
central also to our involving women in these arenas.
Pamela Takayoshi is an associate professor and the Director of Computer-Mediated
Writing at the University of Louisville. She is coeditor (with Kristine Blair) of Feminist
Cyberscapes: Mapping Gendered Academic Spaces (Ablex, 1999). She is currently engaged
in a year-long, ethnographic study of a high school writing teacher and her senior writing
classes.
REFERENCES
Anderson, Paul V. (1998). Simple gifts: Ethical issues in the conduct of person-based composition
research. College Composition and Communication, 49(1), 63–89.
Cooper, Marilyn, & Selfe, Cynthia, L. (1990). Computer conferences and learning: Authority,
resistance, and internally persuasive discourse. College English, 52, 847–869.
Faigley, Lester. (1992). Fragments of rationality: Postmodernity and the subject of composition.
Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Fey, Marion H. (1994). Finding voice through computer communication: A new venue for collaboration.
Journal of Advanced Composition, 14, 221–238.
Flores, Mary J. (1990). Computer conferencing: Composing a feminist community of writers. In
Carolyn Handa (Ed.), Computers and community: Teaching composition in the twenty-first
century (pp. 106–117). Portsmouth, NH: Boynton/Cook Heinemann.
George, E. Laurie (1989). Taking women professors seriously: Female authority in the computerized
classroom. Computers and Composition, 7, 45–52.
Gerrard, Lisa. (1997). Thoughts on computers, gender, and the body electric. Kairos: A Journal for
Teachers of Writing in Webbed Environments, 2. Available: http://english.ttu.edu/kairos/2.2/
index_f.html [Accessed: August 10, 1999].
Gould, Stephen Jay. (1997, September 28). Sidebar quote. The New York Times Magazine (Special
Issue: “What Technology Is Doing to Us”), 65.
Haraway, Donna. (1985). A manifesto for cyborgs: Science, technology, and socialist feminism in
the 1980s. Socialist Review, 80, 65–105.
Hartwell, Patrick. (1987). Creating a literate environment in freshman English: Why and how.
Rhetoric Review, 6, 4–19.
Complicated Women 137
Hawisher, Gail E., & Selfe, Cynthia, L. (1991). The rhetoric of technology and the electronic writing
class. College Composition and Communication, 42, 55–65.
Hawisher, Gail E., & Sullivan, Patricia. (1998). Women on the networks: Searching for presence in
online discussions. In Susan Jarratt & Lynn Worsham (Eds.), Feminism and composition
studies: In other words (pp. 172–197). New York: MLA Press.
Janangelo, Joseph. (1991). Technopower and technooppression: Some abuses of power and control
in computer-assisted writing environments. Computers and Composition, 9, 47–64.
Jessup, Emily. (1991). Feminism and computers in composition instruction. In Gail E. Hawisher &
Cynthia L. Selfe (Eds.), Evolving perspectives on computers and composition studies:
Questions for the 1990s (pp. 336–355).Urbana, IL: NCTE Press.
Kantrowitz, Barbara. (1994, May 16). Men, women, and computers. Newsweek, 48–55.
Kaplan, Nancy, & Farrell, Eva. (1994). Weavers of webs: A portrait of young women on the Net.
The Arachnet Electronic Journal of Virtual Culture, 2(3).
Kinkead, Joyce. (1987). Computer conversation: E-Mail and writing instruction. College Composition
and Communication, 38, 337–341.
Kirsch, Gesa, & Ritchie, Joy. (1995). Beyond the personal: Theorizing a politics of location in
composition research. College Composition and Communication, 46, 7–29.
Kitzinger, Celia. (1991). Feminism, psychology, and the paradox of power. Feminism and Psychology,
1, 111–130.
Kremers, Marshall. (1988). Adams Sherman Hill meets ENFI: An inquiry and a retrospective.
Computers and Composition, 7, 69–77.
Markussen, Randi. (1995). Constructing easiness: Historical perspectives on work, computerization,
and women. In Susan Leigh Star (Ed.), The cultures of computing (pp. 158–180). Oxford:
Blackwell Publishers.
Miller, Laura. (1995). Women and children first: Gender and the settling of the electronic frontier.
In James Brooks & Iain A. Boal (Eds.), Resisting the virtual life: The culture and politics of
information (pp. 49–58). San Francisco: City Lights Books.
Newkirk, Thomas. (1996). Seduction and betrayal in qualitative research. In Peter Mortensen &
Gesa Kirsch (Eds.), Ethics and representation in qualitative studies of literacy (pp. 3–16).
Urbana, IL: NCTE Press.
Regan, Alison. (1993). ‘Type normal like the rest of us’: Writing, power, and homophobia in the
networked composition classroom. Computers and Composition, 10, 11–23.
Rich, Adrienne. (1979). Taking women students seriously. On lies, secrets, and silence. Selected
prose 1966–1978 (pp. 237–246). New York: Norton.
Romano, Susan. (1993). The egalitarianism narrative: Whose story? Whose yardstick? Computers
and Composition, 10, 5–28.
Schriner, Delores, & Rice, William. (1989). Computer conferencing and collaborative learning: A
discourse community at work. College Composition and Communication, 40, 472–478.
Selfe, Cynthia, L. (1990). Technology in the English classroom: Computers through the lens of
feminist theory. In Carolyn Handa (Ed.), Computers and community: Teaching composition
in the twenty-first century (pp. 118–139). Portsmouth, NH: Boynton/Cook Heinemann.
Takayoshi, Pamela. (1994). Building new networks from the old: Women’s experiences with
electronic communications. Computers and Composition, 11, 21–35.
Takayoshi, Pamela; Huot, Emily; & Huot, Meghan. (1999). No boys allowed: The world wide web
as a clubhouse for girls. Computers and Composition, 16(1), 89–106.
Wilkinson, Sue. (1986). Feminist social psychology: Developmental theory and practice. Philadelphia:
Open University Press.
Zimmerman, Jan. (1981). Technology and the future of women: Haven’t we met somewhere before?
Women’s Studies International Quarterly, 4, 355–367.
138 TAKAYOSHI
