

The Emergence of Environmental Humanities

	Since the beginning of the twenty-first century a new academic field has emerged: the environmental humanities. This interdisciplinary endeavor developed simultaneously in many parts of the world. It achieved a self-conscious international identity and a name after decades of research by individuals and after the formation of academic associations interested in environmental issues. This book is not an intellectual history of this movement\'92s diverse origins. Rather, it introduces the field to anyone whose interests it intersects. We explain key concepts, central issues, and current research foci. Along the way we also present some exemplary projects. We have tried to avoid partisanship. We want readers to acquire a knowledge of possible approaches and an awareness of debates within the field. We are not seeking converts to a particular method or ideology. 

	That said, we share some strongly held positions with most people working in the environmental humanities. On the basis of the scientific evidence, we think global warming is taking place, and do not think it is an open question as to whether human beings have contributed to it or not. We believe that species extinction is occurring at an alarming rate, and we reject the notion that humanity has a special place in creation that legitimizes the elimination of other forms of life. We believe that current consumption of the earth\'92s resources is not sustainable. The seas are overfished, the air is increasingly polluted, the oceans contain vast floating islands of plastic, and the amount of garbage produced by human consumption grows year by year. We think that scientists excel at identifying and explaining such problems, but they alone cannot solve them. Solutions will require political and cultural expertise as well. One can build a self-sufficient solar house, for example, but that does not mean the average consumer will buy one. One can design an energy-efficient city, but convincing the public to commit resources to build it and then to live in it is not a scientific problem but an interdisciplinary one. 

	For example, McKinsey & Company developed a plan for an exemplary ecological community of 50,000 to be built on marshy land near Shanghai. Its first stage was slated for completion in time for the world's exposition held there in 2010. Afterwards, it was expected to grow into a city of a million in three decades. In fact, nothing was built. The local farmers were never consulted, nor were scientists studying rare birds in the area included in the planning process, which was very much top-down. The politicians involved were removed after fraud convictions. As in many such projects, the design imposed had little local input, as was also the case with the well-intended ecovillage of Huangbaiyu in northeastern China. Its failure is a cautionary tale against pursuing technological fixes without adequate insight into the historical and cultural context of a proposed solution. A few brick houses were built in Huangbaiyu, but they did not use the materials specified, and they were poorly designed for local farmers, who said the yards were the wrong shape and size for their needs. Many refused to move into the new houses, whose cost overruns raised prices above what they could afford. A journalist who studied the debacle wrote.3Without extensive consultation with local people, it\'92s a challenge for foreign planners, even with the best of intentions, to understand what is required to transplant a farmer who grew up plowing fields into a city dweller.
	Clearly, the humanities have a crucial role to play in understanding and in solving environmental problems such as designing new communities and revitalizing aging cities. However, in this book we do not claim that we already know how to solve the many fundamental challenges to society. We seek, rather, to show how humanists are improving our understanding of the problems and contributing to their solution. That brings us to a final strongly held position across the environmental humanities: that humanists must offer constructive knowledge as well as criticism. Fortunately, this view seems to be widely held by millennials. Surveys show that millennials, far more than members of older generations, give environmental issues high priority and actively seek solutions. 
	This book surveys key concepts, influential theories, and central debates of a rapidly evolving field. It is an introduction, not a catalog. It moves from earlier theories to more recent ones, and in the process shows that it is impossible to separate environmental analysis from discussions of industrialization and western imperialism, which together accelerated resource extraction, consumption, pollution, population growth, species extinction, and global warming. Even a brief excursion into the literature of the environmental humanities will demonstrate, too, that many striking contributions have come from scholars concerned with gender, race, and queer theory. Our goal is not to adjudicate every debate or champion one theory over another so much as it is to introduce a rich array of ideas in such a way that the reader can gain a preliminary grasp of the environmental humanities and, using the bibliography, decide what to read next. If we think a concept is inherently confusing or a theory flawed, we will say so. However, we have not searched for straw men to demolish; rather, we have focused on what seem the most intriguing and potentially productive approaches.

 Emmett, Robert S., and Nye, David E.
 The Environmental Humanities : A Critical Introduction
Cambridge: MIT Press, 2017. Accessed February 28, 2024. ProQuest Ebook Central