Marine conservation -- Global marine biological diversity: A strategy for building conservation into decision making edited by Elliott A. Norse



This book is a contribution to the Global Biodiversity Strategy (World Resources Institute. 1992. Washington, D.C.) which made only passing reference to the marine situation. It suggests that "the goal should be to maintain the integrity of life" of the seas. Thus, it leads the reader to expect answers to questions that decision makers would ask: What is marine biological diversity? Why is it so important? What threatens it? And, most essentially, what do we do about it?\
Currently, there exists a paradox of simultaneous discovery and depletion of marine biological diversity. We are realizing that by any measure except total described species, marine systems are globally about twice as diverse as the land, a not-surprising revelation considering the seas' dimension and paleohistory. Simultaneously, we realize that virtually all large marine ecosystems are plagued with pollution and fisheries that seem out of control. Furthermore, as this book correctly stresses, the many "services" that are best provided by healthy and biologically diverse marine ecosystems--production of protein, processing of wastes, weather regulation, and carbon cycling--may be threatened, as all depend heavily upon complex biological interactions. Thus, we must take heed of this books warning that "the entire marine realm, from estuaries and coastal waters to the pen ocean and the deep sea is at risk."\
The topical content of this book is wide-ranging and is the product of literally hundreds of contributors. The first five chapters serve to define marine biological diversity and its importance, to make distinctions between terrestrial and marine conservation, to suggest some areas and some species of special importance, and to describe threats and impediments to marine biological diversity. Three following chapters are dedicated to stating the goal, content, and tools of the strategy itself. The final chapter consists of recommendations--142 of them in a dozen categories, occupying 26 pages, many, if not most, of which are on-going activities occurring in a variety of nations, organizations, scientific projects, and agencies. Too many are bureaucratic calls for meetings and agreements; too few lead clearly and logically to tangible "on the ground" or "in the water" activities. Significantly lacking is a recommendation for a review of the successes and failures of conservation itself and the agencies, scientific organizations, and NGOs that are presumably accountable for successes or failures. As this book itself suggests, an objective analysis of "what does and what does not work" would have been helpful for defining future activities.\
Moreover, no true strategy is presented here. Strategy is the "game plan" that falls between policies and goals (winning the game) and tactics (conducting the battles). Thus, if one wishes to "save, study, and use" biological diversity, as this book frequently states, it is essential to formulate specific plans for achieving those objectives, as well as to make explicit the criteria for establishing actions, options, and priorities. It is not sufficient to repeat well-worn conversation criteria--e.g., "hotspots" of diversity, endemism, and productivity; areas for spawning, nursery, etc.; and migration paths and bottlenecks. The criteria require evaluation. Hotspots are not congruent among taxa; endemism is scale-dependent, and highly variable; and high marine productivity cannot be associated with species richness. Indeed, if the criteria given are literally followed, every area of Earth will be found to be "critical" for something biological and, therefore, of high priority! Inevitably, this leads to "agonies of choice," oft-mentioned in recent literature, but not discussed here.\
Conservation will ultimately depend on understanding of how biodiversity at all scales (from genes to ecosystems) originates and persists and thus upon knowledge of how ecosystems are structured, how biodiversity is distributed, and what the relationships may be between biodiversity and ecological function. Nevertheless, pervading this book is an unfortunate attitude towards science. For example, it is stated that one reason for scientific uncertainty is "the lower esteem accorded applied research...by members of the scientific community [who] would rather generate information that is intellectually stimulating than information directly pertaining to modern challenges, no matter how much it is needed." This may be a reflection of the out-dated perception of an "ivory-tower" scientific attitude. It is also stated that "...most marine research has scientific gals and is not designed to answer questions about the health of the sea..." and that "...very few scientists become decision makers...except when they are seeking funding." Yet, the great body of research devoted to ecosystem dynamics and "health" is ignored. In fact, scientists have long been leading oceanographic institutions, fisheries agencies, and parks, wildlife, and conservation agencies. The likes of Aldo Leopold, Rachel Carson, Archie Carr, Raymond Dasmann, Edward Wilson, and many others have inspired conservation. The Society of Conservation Biology, IUCN, the Wilderness Society, and others have been created by scientists who have been first to recognize environmental problems.\
This problem is particularly revealed in discussions concerning fisheries and whaling. It is said that "there has been astoundingly little study of the effects of intense fishing pressure on sustainability." In actuality, scientists and managers have long been aware of the deficiencies of deterministic fisheries models and much recent research has been devoted to multi-species approaches and ecosystem management. Concerning whaling, warnings about serious declines date at least from pre-World War I. A few courageous scientists during the 1950s and 60s brought the situation to a head, with the public and conservationist furor emerging as a result. This book makes no mention of this history nor of the 1972 U.S. Marine Mammal Protection Act's call for management under the concept of "optimum sustainable population"--the first legislative attempt to place management of any marine creatures in context of their environments.\
There is also little treatment of several important scientific programs devoted to the goals of cooperative research on biological diversity and its conservation. One is the global program called Diversitas. From about 1988, this IUBS-SCOPE-UNESCO program has been pursuing issues of biological diversity. Initially, this program sought to get the science straight by developing sets of hypotheses on the ecosystem function of biodiversity. Another concerns the Sustainable Biosphere Initiative, initiated by the Ecological Society of America and adopted internationally among ecologists. But most surprising is the lack of mention of many conservation organizations worldwide that have significantly influenced marine conservation: for the U.S. these include The Audubon Society (fisheries), the Natural Resources Defense Council (coastal zone), and many others. Australia has led in marine-protected-area concepts and their implementation, but there is no mention of Australia's overall authority, the Australian Nature Conservation Agency. Many other national programs go unreferenced. Finally, the Literature Cited, with almost 400 references, contains some glaring omissions, for example: G. E. Hutchinson, who first asked the still unresolved question, "why are there so many kinds of animals?"; Pearse and Buchsbaum's and R. M. May's quantifications of the overwhelmingly greater phyletic diversity of the sea than the land; and E. O. Wilson's writings on biodiversity.
For all these reasons, one does not get a sense in this book of the complex oceanic structure that determines the distributions of marine organisms, nor of the complexity of the many attempts to address the scientific and conservation questions involved. The land-sea interactions of the coastal zone, where most people live and where most of the problems lie, are barely mentioned. Other topics that are not discussed include: the interactions of disturbance and productivity; the interplay of genetics, selection, and extinction; and links between genetic diversity and phyletic diversity. This book is, therefore, a useful compendium, which nevertheless suffers in being rhetorical rather than analytical, restricted in its treatment, and decidedly "western" in slant. A previous review (Angel, Martin. 1994. Nature 367:126-127) gave deserved credit to this book's intention of bringing marine conservation to the fore, but summed it up as follows: "On the evidence of this book the conservation movement seems too divorced from the scientific base from which must come the knowledge it seeks, the technology it requires for monitoring and the ability it needs to understand change and to predict ecosystem response."
In conclusion, this book might be used with care as a primer on marine biological diversity, but should not be considered definitive. Most urgently, a crisp, analytical revelation of strategy. which is so urgently needed, still awaits expression. Meanwhile, we should observe its final line: "The precautionary principle should govern the way we treat the sea."
\