Article

Datafication, dataism and dataveillance: Big
Data between scientific paradigm and ideology

José van Dijck
University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
j.van.dijck@uva.nl

Abstract
Metadata and data have become a regular currency for citizens to pay for their communication services and security—a trade-off
that has nestled into the comfort zone of most people. This article deconstructs the ideological grounds of datafication.
Datafication is rooted in problematic ontological and epistemological claims. As part of a larger social media logic, it shows
characteristics of a widespread secular belief. Dataism, as this conviction is called, is so successful because masses of people—
naively or unwittingly—trust their personal information to corporate platforms. The notion of trust becomes more problematic
because people’s faith is extended to other public institutions (e.g. academic research and law enforcement) that handle their
(meta)data. The interlocking of government, business, and academia in the adaptation of this ideology makes us want to look
more critically at the entire ecosystem of connective media.

Introduction
When Edward Snowden, on June 10, 2013, made himself known as the whistleblower that had exposed
N.S.A. practices of routine surveillance to the news media, he described in detail the “architecture of
oppression” that enabled him and many other N.S.A.-contractors to intercept the metadata of three billion
phone calls and interactions recorded by Facebook, Google, Apple, and other tech companies. In a
videotaped interview, the former CIA-analyst said he could no longer live with the extensive privacy
invasion and legal violations he had to perform on behalf of the intelligence community. He also wanted
to make people aware of the fact that many agents have complete access to all kinds of communication
data, hoping to spark a public debate.
Snowden’s disclosures have been more than a wakeup call for citizens who have gradually come to accept
the “sharing” of personal information—everything from marital status to colds, and from eating habits to
favorite music—via social network sites or apps as the new norm (van Dijck 2013a). Platform owners
routinely share users’ aggregated metadata with third parties for the purpose of customized marketing in
exchange for free services. Many people may not have realized, up until Snowden’s leaks, that corporate
social networks also—willingly or reluctantly—share their information with intelligence agencies. When
Barack Obama defended his administration’s policies of mass surveillance saying that there was “no
content, just metadata” involved in the PRISM scheme, he added that citizens cannot expect a hundred per
cent security and a hundred per cent privacy and no inconvenience. The president’s explanation echoed
social media companies’ argument that users have to give up part of their privacy in exchange for free
convenient platform services. In other words, metadata appear to have become a regular currency for

van Dijck, José. 2014. Datafication, dataism and dataveillance: Big Data between scientific paradigm
and ideology. Surveillance & Society 12(2): 197-208.
http://www.surveillance-and-society.org | ISSN: 1477-7487
© The author(s), 2014 | Licensed to the Surveillance Studies Network under a Creative Commons
Attribution Non-Commercial No Derivatives license.

van Dijck: Datafication, dataism and dataveillance

citizens to pay for their communication services and security—a trade-off that has nestled into the comfort
zone of most people.
What explains this remarkable tolerance for Big Brother and Big Business routinely accessing citizens’
personal information also known as Big Data? Part of the explanation may be found in the gradual
normalization of datafication as a new paradigm in science and society. Datafication, according to MayerSchoenberger and Cukier (2013) is the transformation of social action into online quantified data, thus
allowing for real-time tracking and predictive analysis. Businesses and government agencies dig into the
exponentially growing piles of metadata collected through social media and communication platforms,
such as Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn, Tumblr, iTunes, Skype, WhatsApp, YouTube, and free e-mail
services such as gmail and hotmail, in order to track information on human behavior: “We can now collect
information that we couldn’t before, be it relationships revealed by phone calls or sentiments unveiled
through tweets” (Mayer-Schoenberger and Cukier 2013: 30). Datafication as a legitimate means to access,
understand and monitor people’s behavior is becoming a leading principle, not just amongst technoadepts, but also amongst scholars who see datafication as a revolutionary research opportunity to
investigate human conduct.
In this article, I would like to deconstruct the ideological grounds of datafication as defined by MayerSchoenberger and Cukier and echoed by many proponents of this new scientific paradigm. I will argue
that in many respects datafication is rooted in problematic ontological and epistemological claims.
However compelling some examples of applied Big Data research, the ideology of dataism shows
characteristics of a widespread belief in the objective quantification and potential tracking of all kinds of
human behavior and sociality through online media technologies. Besides, dataism also involves trust in
the (institutional) agents that collect, interpret, and share (meta)data culled from social media, internet
platforms, and other communication technologies.
Notions of “trust” and “belief” are particularly relevant when it comes to understanding dataveillance: a
form of continuous surveillance through the use of (meta)data (Raley 2013). As Snowden’s documents
made clear, people have faith in the institutions that handle their (meta)data on the presumption that they
comply with the rules set by publicly accountable agents. However, as journalists found out, the N.S.A.
regularly defies court rulings on data use, just as corporations are constantly testing legal limits on privacy
invasion.1 More profoundly, the Snowden files have further opened people’s eyes to the interlocking
practices of government intelligence, businesses, and academia in the adaptation of dataism’s ideological
premises. Therefore, we need to look into the credibility of the whole ecosystem of connective media.
What are the distinctive roles of government, corporations and academia in handling our data? And what
kind of critical attitude is required in the face of this complex system of online information flows?
Datafication and “life mining” as a new scientific paradigm
Over the past decade, datafication has grown to become an accepted new paradigm for understanding
sociality and social behavior. With the advent of Web 2.0 and its proliferating social network sites, many
aspects of social life were coded that had never been quantified before—friendships, interests, casual
conversations, information searches, expressions of tastes, emotional responses, and so on. As tech
companies started to specialize in one or several aspects of online communication, they convinced many
people to move parts of their social interaction to web environments. Facebook turned social activities
such as “friending” and “liking” into algorithmic relations (Bucher 2012; Helmond and Gerlitz 2013);
Twitter popularized people’s online personas and promoted ideas by creating “followers” and “retweet”
functions (Kwak et al. 2010); LinkedIn translated professional networks of employees and job seekers into
1Advocacy

group Consumer Watchdog, in May 2013, filed a suit against Google claiming that Google unlawfully
opens up, reads, and acquires the content of people's private email messages.

Surveillance & Society 12(2)

198

van Dijck: Datafication, dataism and dataveillance

digital interfaces (van Dijck 2013b); and YouTube datafied the casual exchange of audiovisual content
(Ding et al. 2011). Quantified social interactions were subsequently made accessible to third parties, be it
fellow users, companies, government agencies, or other platforms. The digital transformation of sociality
spawned an industry that builds its prowess on the value of data and metadata—automated logs showing
who communicated with whom, from which location, and for how long. Metadata—not too long ago
considered worthless byproducts of platform-mediated services—have gradually been turned into
treasured resources that can ostensibly be mined, enriched, and repurposed into precious products.
The industry-driven datafication view resonates not only in entrepreneurs’ auspicious gold rush
metaphors, but also in researchers’ claims hailing Big Data as the holy grail of behavioral knowledge.
Data and metadata culled from Google, Facebook, and Twitter are generally considered imprints or
symptoms of people’s actual behavior or moods, while the platforms themselves are presented merely as
neutral facilitators. Twitter supposedly enables the datafication of people’s sentiments, thoughts, and gutfeelings as the platform records “spontaneous” reactions; users leave traces unconsciously, so data can be
“collected passively without much effort or even awareness on the part of those being recorded” (MayerSchoenberger and Cukier 2013: 101). Analysts often describe the large-scale gauging of tweets as using a
thermometer to measure feverish symptoms of crowds reacting to social or natural events—an assumption
founded on the idea that online social traffic flows through neutral technological channels. In this line of
reasoning, neither Twitter’s technological mediation by hashtags, retweets, algorithms, and protocols, nor
its business model seems relevant (Gillespie 2010).
Researchers endorsing the datafication paradigm tend to echo these claims concerning the nature of social
media data as natural traces and of platforms as neutral facilitators. Information scientists have called
Twitter a “sensor” of real-time events when processing people’s tweets about earthquakes or other
disasters (Sakaki, Okazaki and Matsuo 2010); Twitter has also been termed a “sentiment detector” of
people’s political predilections (O’Connor et al. 2010) and a tool that helps understand the “dynamics of
sentiment” by analyzing twitterers’ reactions to a specific video fragment (Diakopoulos and Shamma
2010; Bollen, Mao and Pepe 2010. Assessing big data sets collected through social media platforms is
increasingly presented as the most scrupulous and comprehensive method to measure quotidian
interaction, superior to sampling (“N=all”) and more reliable than interviewing or polling. Large amounts
of “messy” data replace small amounts of sampled data and, as proponents assert, the sheer size of data
sets compensates for their messiness. Some information scientists argue that Twitter is in fact a giant realtime polling tool, ready to become “a substitute and supplement for traditional polling” (O’Connor et al.
2010). There are important parallels between polls and Twitter data, and the correlations found in Twitter
results are obviously meaningful. However, caveats about Twitter’s alleged representativeness and
(technological and commercial) biases are poorly addressed.2
Datafication enthusiasts also often assume a self-evident relationship between data and people,
subsequently interpreting aggregated data to predict individual behavior. For instance, Quercia et al.
(2011) analyzed the relationships between personality and different types of twitterers, finding that
2Just

a few remarks about Twitter’s alleged representativeness and inherent biases. Twitter's user base do not match
the demographics of a general public. A Pew Internet and American Life Project, published in February 2012,
found that only 15 per cent of online adults use Twitter and only 8 per cent use it on a daily basis (see
http://pewinternet.org/Reports/2012/Twitter-Use-2012/Findings.aspx). Furthermore, Twitter deploys several
algorithms that favor influential users and allow for manipulation of tweet messages, either by the platform itself or
by concerted groups of users (see Cha et al. 2010). Twitter data are often treated as equivalents of polling results,
despite explicit disqualifications of the tool’s representational value. For instance, the Twitter Political Index or
Twindex, launched in January 2012, tracks tweets that mention candidates running for office. Twindex, a
partnership between Twitter, search engine Topsy and a bipartisan pair of political pollsters, attempts to measure
“the public's shifting moods, as well as to establish Twitter as a platform for civic debate" (see
https://election.twitter.com/).
Surveillance & Society 12(2)

199

van Dijck: Datafication, dataism and dataveillance

popular and influential users are both “imaginative” and “organized”. On the basis of these patterns, they
speculate which users may successfully recommend products or help boost marketing strategies. Along
similar lines, a recent study by Kosinski and others (2013) shows how private traits and attributes are
predictable from digital records of human behavior; in this case, Facebook Likes were used to
“automatically and accurately predict a range of highly sensitive personal attributes including: sexual
orientation, ethnicity, religious and political views, personality traits, intelligence, happiness, use of
addictive substances, parental separation, age, and gender” (Kosinski, Stillwell and Graepel 2013: 1). The
authors conclude that such private information may be used to optimize personalized platform services
and offer social psychologists a wealth of data they could never have gained otherwise.
Identifying patterns of conduct or activities out of unconsciously left (meta)data on social network sites
increasingly serves to predict future behavior. Information scientists Weerkamp and De Rijke (2012) state
it very clearly: “We are not interested in current or past activities of people, but in their future plans. We
propose the task of activity prediction, which revolves around trying to establish a set of activities that are
likely to be popular at a later time.” They position activity prediction as a special case of “life mining”, a
concept defined as “extracting useful knowledge from the combined digital trails left behind by people
who live a considerable part of their life online.” The phrase “useful knowledge” begs the question: useful
for whom? According to Weerkamp and De Rijke, social media monitoring provides meaningful
information for police and intelligence services to forecast nascent terrorist activity or calculate crowd
control, and for marketers to predict future stock market prices or potential box office revenues (see also
Asur and Huberman 2011. From the viewpoints of surveillance and marketing, predictive analytics—
relating (meta)data patterns to individual’s actual or potential behavior and vice versa—yields powerful
information about who we are and what we do. When it comes to human behavior, though, this logic may
also reveal a slippery slope between analysis and projection, between deduction and prediction (Amoore
2011).
A “big data mindset” also seems to favor the paradoxical premise that social media platforms
concomitantly measure, manipulate, and monetize online human behavior. Even though metadata culled
from social media platforms are believed to reflect human behavior-as-it-is, the algorithms employed by
Google, Twitter and other sites are intrinsically selective and manipulative; both users and owners can
game the platform. For instance, when Diakopoulos and Shamma (2010) predict political preferences by
analyzing debate performance through tweets, they seem to ignore the potential for spin-doctors or
partisan twitterers to influence Twitter debates in real time. In marketing circles, the prediction of future
customers’ needs is akin to the manipulation of desire: detecting specific patterns in consumer habits often
results in simultaneous attempts to create demand—a marketing strategy that is successfully monetized
through Amazon’s famed recommendation algorithm (Andrejevic 2011). Social media content, just like
internet searches, is subject to personalization and customization, tailoring messages to specific audiences
or individuals (Pariser 2011; Bucher 2012). Promoting the idea of metadata as traces of human behavior
and of platforms as neutral facilitators seems squarely at odds with the well-known practices of data
filtering and algorithmic manipulation for commercial or other reasons.
Datafication and life mining are staked in ideological assumptions, which are, in turn, rooted in prevailing
social norms. As said before, users provide personal information to companies and receive services in
return—a form of barter. Metadata in exchange for communication services has become the norm; few
people appear willing to pay for more privacy.3 The currency used to pay for online services and for
security has turned metadata into a kind of invisible asset, processed mostly separate from its original
context and outside of people’s awareness. Social media companies monetize metadata by repackaging
3 A report by the European Network Information and Security Agency (ENISA 2012), showed that less than onethird of experimental subjects in a study on “privacy-for-data” exchange were willing to pay extra if the serviceprovider promised not to use their data for marketing purposes.

Surveillance & Society 12(2)

200

van Dijck: Datafication, dataism and dataveillance

and selling them to advertisers or data companies. Information scientists often uncritically adopt the
assumptions and ideological viewpoints put forward by SNSs and data firms. The datafication paradigm
thus performs a profound ideological role at the intersection of sociality, research, and commerce—an
inextricable knot of functions that has been conspicuously under-examined.
Dataism: unraveling datafication’s ideological underpinnings
The data mining metaphor is grounded in a peculiar rationale that guides entrepreneurs, academics, and
state agencies in their pursuit of a new social-scientific paradigm. First and foremost, dataism betrays a
belief in the objectivity of quantification and in the potential of tracking all kinds of human behavior and
sociality through online data. Secondly, (meta)data are presented as “raw material” that can be analyzed
and processed into predictive algorithms about future human behavior—valuable assets in the mining
industry. Let me explore in more detail each of these ontological and epistemological assertions
underpinning dataism as a belief in a new gold standard of knowledge about human behavior.
A first line of critical inquiry is leveled at the alleged objective nature of data. In a thought-provoking
essay, social scientists boyd and Crawford (2012: 2) deconstruct the widespread mythology that “large
data sets offer a higher form of intelligence and knowledge that can generate insights that were previously
impossible, with the aura of truth, objectivity, and accuracy.” Piles of (meta)data are purposefully
generated through a number of different online platforms which are anything but objective. Metadata
relate to human behavioral acts in the same way as MRI scans relate to body interiors: signs of disease
never simply appear on a screen, but are the result of careful interpretation and intervention in the imaging
process. It took medical technicians decades to learn proper imaging of specific organs; they had to refine
protocols for positioning bodies and tweak the machine’s performance to enhance the tool’s usefulness
(van Dijck 2005). Facebook and Twitter are apparatuses that are constantly tweaked to translate friendship
or popularity into algorithms while promoting these very computations as social values (Manovich 2011;
Bucher 2012). “Likes” and “trending topics” buttons may be commonly perceived as icons of spontaneous
online sociality, but the algorithms underlying these buttons are systematically fine-tuned to channel user
responses (Mahrt and Scharkow 2013).
The idea of (meta)data being “raw” resources waiting to be processed perfectly fits the popular life-mining
metaphor. According to Mayer-Schoenberger and Cukier (2013), each single data set is likely to have
some intrinsic, hidden, not yet unearthed value, and companies are engaged in a race to discover how to
capture and rate this value. But as Lisa Gitelman aptly states, “raw data” is an oxymoron: “Data are not
facts, they are ‘that which is given prior to argument’ given in order to provide a rhetorical basis. Data can
be good or bad, better or worse, incomplete and insufficient” (Gitelman 2013: 7). Automated data
extraction performed on huge piles of metadata generated by social media platforms reveals no more
information about specific human behavior than large quantities of sea water yield information about
pollution—unless you interpret these data using specific analytical methods guided by a focused query.
Here is an example to illustrate this point. A team of information scientists collected six months of search
results culled at regular intervals from users who first entered the keyword “home mortgage” into a search
engine, in order to find how correlations changed over time (Richardson 2008). The data “show” how
mortgage seekers, six weeks after their initial query, move from mortgage basics to insurance and taxes;
three months later they look for furnishings, and six months after their initial mortgage query they are
interested in pools and patio accessories. However, correlations like these do not simply “emerge”. They
are much rather induced by an implicit question framing the inquiry: what do new homeowners need to
buy in the first six months after acquiring their home? Explicating this question reveals that an
interpretative frame always prefigures data analysis. Following Gitelman’s line of thought, data provide a
rhetorical basis for the argument that new homeowners “need” certain stuff at certain moments—a pattern
prediction valuable to advertisers.

Surveillance & Society 12(2)

201

van Dijck: Datafication, dataism and dataveillance

Making sense of patterns thus requires critical interrogation: why do we look for certain patterns in piles
of metadata, in whose interests, and for what purposes? Identifying meaningful patterns on the basis of
data culled from online platforms is an intrinsically interpretative act, although you may have to spell out
implicit prerogatives. Messages from millions of female Facebook users between 25 and 35 years of age
posting baby pictures in their Timeline may be endlessly scrutinized for behavioral, medical, or
consumerist patterns. Do researchers want to learn about young mothers’ dieting habits with the intention
of inserting propositions to change lifestyles? Or do they want to discover patterns of consumptive needs
in order for companies to sell baby products at exactly the right moment? Or, perhaps far-fetched, are
government agencies interested in interpreting these data for signs of postnatal depression or potential
future child abuse? Quantitative methods beg for qualitative interrogation to disprove the claim that data
patterns are “natural” phenomena. Big data research, in other words, always involves an explicit prism (no
pun intended).
Raw data do not go in at one end of the digital assembly lines managed by Google or Facebook while
processed information comes out at the other end, as Mayer-Schonberger and Cukier (2013: 101) contend.
Metadata are value-laden piles of code that are multivalent and should be approached as multiinterpretable texts. According to American scholar John Cheney-Lippold, data are cultural objects
“embedded and integrated within a social system whose logic, rules, and explicit functioning work to
determine the new conditions of possibilities of users’ lives” (Cheney-Lippold 2011: 167). Big Data
configured as a rhetorical text which has been generated for specific purposes and which can be probed by
various groups of people, offers an alternative to the pervasive mining metaphor. Academics looking at
data sets from a social science or humanities perspective may pose very different questions than
information scientists; and medical doctors are likely to see different patterns than criminologists
(Manovich 2011).
The compelling logic of dataism is often fueled by the rhetoric of new frontiers in research, when large
sets of unconsciously left data, never available before, are opening up new vistas. Dataism thrives on the
assumption that gathering data happens outside any preset framework—as if Twitter facilitates
microblogging just for the sake of generating “life” data—and data analysis happens without a preset
purpose—as if data miners analyze those data just for the sake of accumulating knowledge about people’s
behavior. It may not always be simple to identify in what context (meta)data are generated and for what
purposes they are processed. And yet it is crucial to render hidden prerogatives explicit if researchers want
to keep up users’ trust in the datafication paradigm. Trust is partly grounded in the persuasive logic of a
dominant paradigm; for another part, though, faith resides with the institutions that carry the belief in Big
Data.
Dataism and the trust in institutions
A second line of critical inquiry is leveled at the institutional structures that scaffold Big Data thinking.
Data companies, government agencies and researchers alike underscore the importance of users’ trust in
societies where growing parts of civilian life—from application procedures to medical records and
financial transactions—are moved onto online platforms. Establishing and maintaining the system’s
integrity is often assigned as a task to “the state”—whereas “the platforms” have to comply with the rules
set by government agencies. When Mayer-Schoenberger and Cukier (2013) address the perils of
metadata’s ubiquitous availability—i.e. profiling based on stereotypes, penalties based on propensities,
surveillance based on association, a weakened right to privacy—they hold governments responsible for
taking measures to avert these potential risks. The authors of Big Data call for a new “caste of big-data
auditors we call algorithmists” to “secure a fair governance of information in the big-data era” (MayerSchoenberger and Cukier 2013: 184). Academics, too, count on national governments to regulate possibly
adverse effects of datafication; but they also turn to data companies when they call for “trust and
goodwill” from corporations and ask them to give users “transparency and control” over their information

Surveillance & Society 12(2)

202

van Dijck: Datafication, dataism and dataveillance

(Kosinski et al. 2013). In striving for trust and credibility, there is a presumed separation of public,
corporate, and state institutions as autonomous bodies that each has a distinctive relationship with users—
whether consumers or citizens.
Needless to say, neither “the state” nor “data firms” are monolithic categories. For one thing, various
government agencies—besides the N.S.A—each represent a specific relationship with users and thus play
a specific role in the maintenance of trust. Agencies like the F.T.C and the N.I.S.T. have the legal means
and the political obligation to secure citizens against privacy and exploitation risks propelled by the
datafication paradigm.4 Data companies, for their part, are simultaneously competitors and allies when it
comes to winning and keeping users’ trust. Users’ faith in their data policies may be part of a single
company’s competitive edge; however, since partnerships in this sector abound it is impossible for users
to keep track of who shares data with whom.
And yet, if the Snowden files have taught us anything, it is probably that institutions gathering and
processing Big Data are not organized apart from the agencies that have the political mandate to regulate
them. In fact, all three apparatuses—corporate, academic, and state—are highly staked in getting
unrestraint access to metadata as well as in the public’s acceptance of datafication as a leading paradigm.
Scientists, government agencies and corporations, each for different reasons, have a vested interest in
datafied relationships and in the development of methods that allow for prediction as well as manipulation
of behavior. The aspirations of all agents to know, predict, and control human behavior overlap to some
extent but differ on other accounts. Data firms want their platforms to be acknowledged as objective,
standardized aggregators of metadata—better and more precise than the tools government agencies or
academics use for measuring consumer sentiment, public health, or social movements.5 When government
agencies and academics adopt commercial social media platforms as the gold standard for measuring
social traffic, they in fact transfer the power over data-collection and interpretation from the public to the
corporate sector. As boyd and Crawford (2012: 14) argue: “There is a deep government and industrial
drive toward gathering and extracting maximal value from data, be it information that will lead to more
targeted advertising, product design, traffic planning, or criminal policing.”
In this tripartite alignment of forces, government, academia, and data firms are interconnected at the level
of personnel as well as through their exchange of innovative technologies, i.e. by co-developing data
mining projects. In an article on the Snowden case for The New York Times, reporters Risen and Wingfield
(2013) bare close connections between Silicon Valley and the N.S.A.: “Both hunt for ways to collect,
analyze and exploit large pools of data about millions of Americans. The only difference is that the N.S.A.
does it for intelligence, and Silicon Valley does it to make money.” Links between data firms and state
intelligence agencies show how technical experts rotate jobs between academia and health industries, and
move from data firms to financial services or intelligence agencies. The interests of corporations,
academics, and state agencies converge in various ways. For instance, Skype and its owner Microsoft
readily engaged with the C.I.A. on Project Chess aimed at making Skype calls useable to law enforcement
officials. As Timothy Garton-Ash (2013) quipped in an op-ed in The Guardian: if Big Brother came back
in the 21st century, “he would return as a private-public partnership.”

4

The American Federal trade Commission (F.T.C.) is assigned to protect consumers and to eliminate and prevent
anti-competitive business practices; the National Institute of Standards and Technology (N.I.S.T.) is the agency
charged with setting federal cybersecurity standards. Both agencies scrambled to restore public confidence after
Snowden’s revelations about the N.S.A.
5 Google executives argue that Google search data can reveal trends a week or two earlier than official government
statistics (Aspen Institute Report 2010). In addition, it is argued that Google Flu Trends is a better instrument to
measure for emerging flu epidemics than national surveillance systems for influenza-like symptoms (Wilson et al.
2009).
Surveillance & Society 12(2)

203

van Dijck: Datafication, dataism and dataveillance

What is at issue here is not just an embrace of dataism as a technique of knowing social action—human
behavior being measured, analyzed, and predicted on the basis of large sets of metadata—but also as a
faith in high-tech companies’ and government agencies’ intention to protect user data from exploitation.
Dataism presumes trust in the objectivity of quantified methods as well as in the independence and
integrity of institutions deploying these methods—whether corporate platforms, government agencies, or
academic researchers. Trust and independence, however, are embattled notions in an ecosystem of
connectivity where all online platforms are inevitably interconnected, both on the level of infrastructure as
on the level of operational logic (van Dijck 2013a; van Dijck and Poell 2013). When everything and
everyone is connected through the same infrastructure and operates through the same logic—a view
theorized by Foucault well before the advent of online technologies.
For instance, the logic of predictive analytics appears to be corroborated by governments, researchers, and
corporations alike. Google claims they are much better than state agencies in forecasting unemployment
statistics or flu epidemics because their web crawlers can determine when an individual is about to start
looking for a new job or starts seeking information about influenza. Facebook Likes can potentially
predict which young mothers may be likely to malnourish their children—information which state health
agencies may act upon. And the N.S.A. declares they have prevented at least fifty terrorist attacks due to
the PRISM scheme, based on data culled from social media platforms and e-mail services. Problematic in
these institutional forms of dataism is not only the fact that we lack insight in the algorithmic criteria used
to define what counts as job seeking, dysfunctional motherhood, or terrorism. More questionably, the
contexts in which the data were generated and processed—whether through commercial platforms or
public institutions—all appear to be interchangeable.
What is at stake here is not simply our “trust” in specific government agencies or single corporations, but
the credibility of the entire ecosystem—an ecosystem that is fueled by a steady flow of billions of e-mails,
video, text, sound, and metadata. The custody over data flows appears to be mired in a fuzzy delineation
of territories; access and restrictions to data are fought over both before the public’s eye and outside
people’s realm of knowing. Since Snowden’s revelations, users-citizens have increasingly questioned
American high-tech companies’ cozy relationships with governments, and, in response, some companies
have filed court complaints against what they call N.S.A.-bullying tactics. This public struggle over whom
to trust with user data may serve to enhance the impression of each institution’s independence, and yet, it
is obvious that data firms like Google and Facebook do not operate in a vacuum. The ecosystem is
typically an infrastructure where no single institution is in command (Brivot and Gendron 2011: 153), but
which credibility is disputed in a number of public debates, court struggles, and political skirmishes—
including government attempts to curb whistleblowers’ leaks.
The interpellation of dataism as a shared belief built on institutional trust seems to be equally important
than the interrogation of datafication premises. Embattled notions of “trust” and “belief” are particularly
relevant when it comes to understanding dataveillance as an increasingly preferred way of monitoring
citizens through social media and online communication technologies (Raley 2013). What are the
distinctive interests of government, business, and academia in handling our data? Dataveillance raises
more questions regarding the credibility of the entire system of online information flows.
Dataveillance and the struggle for credibility
Several months after the N.S.A. revelations started, Google, Facebook, Yahoo and Microsoft struck back
at their critics who charged them with government collaboration and betraying users’ privacy by suing the
Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Agency (F.I.S.A.), which provides the legal framework for N.S.A.
operations. Facebook’s Mark Zuckerberg claimed in a newspaper interview that the American government
had done a “bad job of balancing people’s privacy and its duty to protect” and Yahoo’s Marissa Mayer
conceded they had to fight the N.S.A. in court to maintain her company’s trustworthiness towards both

Surveillance & Society 12(2)

204

van Dijck: Datafication, dataism and dataveillance

users and investors (Rushe 2013). Interestingly, what we saw in the aftermath of the Snowden revelations
was that data companies teamed up and rallied against the N.S.A. to regain the public’s trust. The
disclosure of routine dataveillance tactics threatened to seriously undermine not just people’s trust in state
agencies or individual corporations, but in dataism’s institutional pillars as a whole.
Dataveillance—the monitoring of citizens on the basis of their online data—differs from surveillance on at
least one important account: whereas surveillance presumes monitoring for specific purposes,
dataveillance entails the continuous tracking of (meta)data for unstated preset purposes. Therefore,
dataveillance goes well beyond the proposition of scrutinizing individuals as it penetrates every fiber of
the social fabric (Andrejevic 2012: 86). Dataveillance is thus a far-reaching proposition with profound
consequences for the social contract between corporate platforms and government agencies on the one
hand and citizens-consumers on the other. Let’s look more closely at the distinctive role of each actor in
this battle for credibility and trust.
From the onset, Facebook and Google superficially anchored their users’ expectations of trust in corporate
mantras such as “Do no evil” (Google) and “Making the world transparent and connected” (Facebook). To
them, the social contract with consumers was staked in making online sociality visible and traceable; part
of this call for transparency was requiring authentic and verifiable personal information from their
registered customers (van Dijck 2013b). However, platforms offered little transparency in return; from
2007 to this very day, companies like Facebook have engaged in battles with the F.T.C. and courts of law
to defend its continuously changing Terms of Use, which keep stretching its privacy policy.6 Over the past
few years, user advocates have taken Facebook and other platforms to court for unlawfully keeping logs of
user data. Consumer advocacy groups have tirelessly called for explicating the quid-pro-quos of free
online services to help restore public trust in single platforms as well as the ecosystem as a whole. And
alternative platforms for search and communication—e.g. Lavabit, DuckDuckGo, Path, Leaf, and
Silentcircle—have tried to balance off users’ data protection with reliable services. However, it turns out
to be very hard to escape from the rules and practices set by the dominant players in the system.
The compliance of high-tech firms with post-Patriot-Act laws, dutifully reported by journalists in the wake
of the Snowden affair, certainly contributed to the waning public trust in dataveillance tactics; so it is not
surprising to find CEOs from data companies lashing out at the N.S.A. and vocally trying to re-establish
their image as neutral facilitators. Platform owners’ attitude vis-à-vis administrative bodies are often
ambivalent, though. They call upon governments to mend the gaps in laws and policies (Brown, Chui and
Minyika 2011: 11), but these same companies warn the government against overregulation and propose to
leave “openness” to be regulated by the technology sector itself (Schmidt and Cohen 2013).
A similar ambivalence can be seen coming from the government. Obviously, intelligence agencies have
different interests than government regulators. Security and privacy issues often pose contradictory
demands, leading to ambivalent legal definitions, such as Obama’s validation of metadata (“we’re not
listening in on your phone conversations”) as legitimate means for dataveillance. Citizens’ groups rightly
call for clear-cut policies that guard privacy and balance it off with security. Bringing legal definitions in
tune with advanced technological apparatuses is just one pivotal step in the effort to rebuild trust. As we
have seen in the banking crisis, starting in 2008, a loss of trust in the finance sector was caused by a
similar murkiness involved in many complex financial schemes and the high-tech based logic of
derivatives; after two decades of self-regulation, trust in banking systems has come to an all-time low.

6

Over the last year, Facebook had to defend its practice of making “shadow profiles” of friends you connect to by
copying addresses and phone numbers; the platform also had to defend its automatic assumption that the parents of
teenagers using the service have given permission for their names and images to be used in Facebook advertising
(Oremus 2013; Goel and Wyatt 2013).
Surveillance & Society 12(2)

205

van Dijck: Datafication, dataism and dataveillance

Responsibility for maintaining credibility of the ecosystem as a whole also resides with academics. The
unbridled enthusiasm of many researchers for datafication as a neutral paradigm, reflecting a belief in an
objective quantified understanding of the social, ought to be scrutinized more rigorously. Uncritical
acceptance of datafication’s underpinning ideological and commercial premises may well undermine the
integrity of academic research in the long run. To keep and maintain trust, Big Data researchers need to
identify the partial perspectives from which data are analyzed; rather than maintaining claims to neutrality,
they ought to account for the context in which data sets are generated and pair off quantitative
methodologies with qualitative questions. Moreover, the viability and verifiability of predictive analytics
as a scientific method deserves a lot more interdisciplinary enquiry, combining for instance computational,
ethnographic and statistical approaches (Giglietto et al. 2012: 155).
Academics are significant actors in the building of social trust: a paradigm resting on the pillars of
academic institutions often forms an arbiter of what counts as fact or opinion, as fact or projection. In the
world of online sociality, where human behavior is coded into (meta)data and mediated by platforms, the
distinctions between facts, opinions, and predictions—between objectivities, subjectivities, and
potentialities—are gradually erased. In the words of sociologist Bruno Latour (2007), they are obliterated
“in such a way that they are both graduating to the same type of visibility—not a small advantage if we
wish to disentangle the mixture of facts and opinions that has become our usual diet of information.” If
predictive analytics and real-time data analytics become the preferred modes of scientific analysis of
human behavior, humanities and social science scholars seriously need to address the fundamental
epistemological and ontological questions merely scratched upon in the previous sections.
Meanwhile, as Edward Snowden’s unscrupulous actions show, there is an overarching significant actor in
the fight for credibility that is often overlooked: users-citizens. When Snowden made the choice to go
public with his inside information on N.S.A. dataveillance practices, he not only showed the power of an
individual employee to unveil and unsettle a complex state-industrial-academic complex of forces. He also
counted on the vigilance of many citizens—researchers, influential bloggers, journalists, lawyers and
activists—to take public his concern about the structural flaws in the ecosystem that is currently
developing. Over the past decade, the actual power of users-citizens vis-à-vis corporate platforms and the
state has triggered substantial debate, albeit mostly in activist and academic circles. Some have found the
ability of users to resist platforms’ privacy policies and surveillance tactics to be quite limited; individuals
are steered by platforms’ technologies and business models of single platforms while it is extremely hard
to gain insight in the system’s interdependence and complexity (Draper 2012; Hartzog and Selinger 2013;
Mager 2012). Other researchers have argued in favor of strengthening digital (consumer) literacy
particularly at the level of understanding privacy and security in relation to social data (Pierson 2012).
And there is a growing mass of critical scholarship stressing the importance of users in baring how
connective media are forging a new social contract on societies while refurbishing sociality and
democracy in online environments (Langlois 2013; Lovink 2012).
The much wider public debate fueled by Snowden is itself an eminent example of a project to restore the
internet’s credibility.7 It is through shocks like these that people become more aware of the institutional
and ideological forces involved in an evolving paradigm. The popularization of datafication as a neutral
paradigm, carried by a belief in dataism and supported by institutional guardians of trust, gradually
yielded a view of dataveillance as a “normal” form of social monitoring. Perhaps it took Snowden to blow
7

A survey (July 2013) by the Pew Research Center for People and the Press shows that Snowden’s revelations have
indeed affected public opinion on surveillance and security. The report states that a “majority of Americans – 56%
– say that federal courts fail to provide adequate limits on the telephone and internet data the government is
collecting as part of its anti-terrorism efforts. An even larger percentage (70%) believes that the government uses
this data for purposes other than investigating terrorism.” See: http://www.people-press.org/2013/07/26/few-seeadequate-limits-on-nsa-surveillance-program/
Surveillance & Society 12(2)

206

van Dijck: Datafication, dataism and dataveillance

a whistle on these increasingly normalized practices, but it certainly takes more than one whistleblower to
launch a full-fletched inquiry into the new online pillars of democracy and sociality. The issues put on the
agenda by Snowden certainly deserve to remain in the spotlights of public attention until all precarious
matters are addressed.
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank two anonymous reviewers of this article for their insightful and constructive comments. I would also like to
thank Kelly Gates, Mark Andrejevic, Thomas Poell, Maarten de Rijke, Arnold Smeulders and Ton Brouwers for conversations on
this topic and helpful editorial comments.

References
Amoore, L. 2011. Data Derivatives : On the Emergence of a Security Risk Calculus for Our Times. Theory Culture and Society
28 (6): 24-43.
Andrejevic, M. 2011. The work that affective economics does. Cultural Studies 25(4/5): 604-620.
Andrejevic, M. 2012. Exploitation in the data-mine. In: Internet and Surveillance: The Challenges of Web 2.0 and Social Media,
eds C. Fuchs, K. Boersma, A. Albrechtslund, and M. Sandoval, 71-88. New York: Routledge.
Aspen Institute report. 2010. The Promises and perils of Big Data. Washington DC: The Aspen Institute. Available at:
http://www.aspeninstitute.org/publications/promise-peril-big-data (accessed May 7, 2014).
Asur, S. and B.A. Huberman. 2011. Predicting the Future With Social Media.Paper published by Cornell University Open
Library. Available at: http://arxiv.org/abs/1003.5699 (accessed May 7, 2014).
Bollen, J., H. Mao and A. Pepe. 2010. Determining the public mood state by analysis of microblogging posts. Proceedings of the
12th International Conference on the Synthesis and Simulation of Living Systems. Odense, Denmark, 2010. Available
at: http://pti.iu.edu/pubs/determining-public-mood-state-analysis-microblogging-posts (accessed May 7, 2014).
boyd, d. and Kate Crawford. 2012. Critical questions for Big Data. Information, Communication & Society 5(15): 662-679.
Brivot, M. and Y. Gendron. 2011. Beyond panopticism: On the ramiﬁcations of surveillance in a contemporary professional
setting. Accounting, Organizations and Society 36: 135–155.
Brown, B., M. Chui, and J. Manyika. 2011. Are you ready for the era of ‘big data’? Trend report McKinsey Global Institute.
Available at: http://lonerganpartners.com/sites/lonerganpartners/files/Article%20PDFs/are-you-ready-for-era-of-bigdata-10-2011-mckinsey.pdf (accessed May 7, 2014).
Bucher, T. 2012. Want to be on the top? Algorithmic power and the threat of invisibility on Facebook. New Media & Society
14 (7): 1164-1180.
Cha, M., H. Haddadi, F. Benevenuto, and K. P. Gummadi. 2010. Measuring user influence in Twitter: The million dollar fallacy.
Proceedings of the Fourth International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media. Available at
http://pdfcast.org/pdf/measuring-user-influence-in-twitter-the-million-follower-fallacy Last accessed June 12, 2012.
Cheney-Lippold, J. 2011. A new algorithmic identity. Soft biopolitics and the modulation of control. Theory, Culture &Society
28(6): 164-181
Diakopoulos, N. and D. A. Shamma. 2010. Characterizing debate performance via aggregated Twitter sentiment. Paper presented
at the CHI Conference, April 10–15, 2010, Atlanta, GA. Available at http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1753504 .
(Accessed June 13, 2012).
Ding, Y., Y. Du, Y. Hu, Z. Liu, L. Wang, K. W. Ross, and A. Ghose. 2011. Broadcast yourself: Understanding YouTube
uploaders. Paper presented at the Internet Measurement Conference, IMC’11, November 2–4, Berlin. Available at
http://conferences.sigcomm.org/imc/2011/program.htm (accessed May 7, 2014).
Draper, N. 2012. Group Power: Discourses of Consumer Power and Surveillance in Group Buying Websites. Surveillance &
Society 9(4): 394-407.
ENISA. 2012. Study on monetizing privacy. An economic model for pricing personal information.” Published February 27.
Available at: http://www.enisa.europa.eu/activities/identity-and-trust/library/deliverables/monetising-privacy (accessed
May 30, 2012).
Garton-Ash, T. 2013. If Big Brother came back, he'd be a public-private partnership. The Guardian, 27 June, 2013. Opinion page.
Giglietto, F. L. Rossiand D. Bennato. 2012. The Open Laboratory: Limits and Possibilities of Using Facebook, Twitter, and
YouTube as a Research Data Source. Journal of Technology in Human Services 30(3-4): 145-159.
Gillespie, T. 2010. The politics of platforms. New Media & Society 12(3): 347-64.
Gitelman, L., ed. 2013. ‘Raw Data’ is an Oxymoron. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Goel, V. and E. Wyatt. 2013. Facebook Privacy Change Is Subject of F.T.C. Inquiry. The New York Times, 11 September 2013.
Available
at:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/09/12/technology/personaltech/ftc-looking-into-facebook-privacypolicy.html (accessed May 7, 2014).
Hartzog, W. and E. Selinger. 2013. Big Data in Small Hands. Stanford Law Review Online Perspectives 66 (81): 3 September.
Available at: http://www.stanfordlawreview.org/online/privacy-and-big-data/big-data-small-hands (accessed May 7,
2014).
Helmond, A. and C. Gerlitz. 2013. The Like Economy. Social buttons and the data-intensive web. New Media and Society,
Available online: http://nms.sagepub.com/content/early/2013/02/03/1461444812472322.abstract

Surveillance & Society 12(2)

207

van Dijck: Datafication, dataism and dataveillance

Langlois, G. 2013. Participatory Culture and the New Governance of Communication. The Paradox of Participatory Media.
Television and New Media 14 (2): 91-105.
Latour, B. 2007. Beware, your imagination leaves digital traces. Times Higher Literary Supplement April 6. Available at:
http://www.bruno-latour.fr/node/245 (accessed May 7, 2014).
Lovink, G. 2012. Networks Without a Cause. A critique of social media. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Kosinski, M., D. Stillwell, and T. Graepel. 2013. Private traits and attributes are predictable from digital records of human
behavior.
PNAS,
online
first,
March
2013.
Available
at:
http://www.pnas.org/content/early/2013/03/06/1218772110.full.pdf+html (accessed May 7, 2014).
Kwak, H., C. Lee, H. Park, and S. Moon. 2010. What is Twitter, a social network or a news media? Proceedings of the 19th
International World Wide Web (WWW) Conference, April 26–30, Raleigh NC, 591–600. Available at
http://an.kaist.ac.kr/traces/WWW2010.html l (accessed June 12, 2012).
Mager, A. 2012. Algorithmic Ideology. Information, Communication & Society 15(5): 769-787.
Mahrt, M. and M. Scharkow. 2013. The Value of Big Data in Digital Media Research. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic
Media 57 (1): 20-33.
Manovich, L. 2011. Trending: The Promises and the Challenges of Big Social Data. In: Debates in the Digital Humanities, ed.
M.K. Gold, 460-475. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Mayer-Schoenberger, V. and K. Cukier. 2013. Big Data. A Revolution that will transform how we live, work, and think. London:
John Murray Publishers.
O’Connor, B., R. Balasubramanyan, B. R. Routledge, N. A. Smith. 2010. From Tweets to Polls: Linking Text Sentiment to Public
Opinion. Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). 122-129. Available at:
http://www.aaai.org/ocs/index.php/ICWSM/ICWSM10/paper/viewFile/1536/1842 (accessed May 7, 2014).
Oremus, W. 2013. With friends like these. How your friends, family, and co-workers are secretly helping social networks gather
intelligence
on
you.
Slate.com,
June
26.
Available
at:
http://www.slate.com/articles/technology/technology/2013/06/facebook_data_breach_how_social_networks_use_find_f
riends_to_mine_your_contacts.html (accessed May 7, 2014).
Pariser, E. 2011. The Filter Bubble: What the Internet Is Hiding from You. New York: Viking.
Pierson, J. 2012. Online Privacy in Social Media: A Conceptual Exploration of Empowerment and Vulnerability.
Communications and Strategies 88 (4): 99-120.
Quercia, D., M.. Kosinski, D. Stillwell and J. Crowcroft. 2011. Our Twitter profiles, our selves: Predicting personality with
Twitter. IEEE International Conference on Social Computing, Boston, 9-11 October. Available at
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpls/abs_all.jsp (accessed May 7, 2014).
Raley, R. 2013. Dataveillance and Countervailance. In: ‘Raw Data’ is an Oxymoron, ed. L. Gitelman, 121-146. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Richardson, M. 2008. Learning about the world through long-term query behavior. ACM TWeb 2 (4). Available at: ACM Digital
Library http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1409224 (accessed May 7, 2014).
Risen, J. and N. Wingfield. 2013. Silicon Valley and Spy Agency Bound by Strengthening Web. The New York Times, 19 June.
Rushe, D. 2013. Zuckerberg: US Government ‘blew it’ on NSA surveillance.” The Guardian 11 September 2013. Available at:
http://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/sep/11/yahoo-ceo-mayer-jail-nsa-surveillance (accessed May 7, 2014).
Sakaki, T., M. Okazaki and Y. Matsuo. 2010. Earthquake Shakes Twitter Users: Real-time Event Detection by Social Sensors.
International World Wide Web Conference Proceedings, April 26–30, 2010, Raleigh, North Carolina, USA. ACM 9781-60558-799-8/10/04.
Schmidt, E. and J.Cohen. 2013. The New Digital Age. Reshaping the Future of People, Nations and Business. New York: Knopf.
van Dijck, J. 2005. The Transparent Body. A Cultural Analysis of Medical Imaging. Seattle: University of Washington Press.
van Dijck, J. 2013a. The Culture of Connectivity. A Critical History of Social Media. New York: Oxford University Press.
van Dijck, J. 2013b. ‘You have one identity’: Performing the self on Facebook and LinkedIn. Media, Culture & Society 35(2):
199–215.
van Dijck, J. and T. Poell. 2013. Understanding Social Media Logic. Media and Communication 1 (1): 2-14.
Weerkamp, W. and M. de Rijke. 2012. Activity Prediction: A Twitter-based exploration. SIGIR Workshop on Time-aware
Information Access. August 16, Portland. Available at: http://wouter.weerkamp.com/downloads/taia2012-activityprediction.pdf (accessed May 7, 2014).
Wilson, N., K. Mason, M. Tobias, M. Peacey, QS Huang, and M. Baker. 2009. Interpreting Google flu trends data for pandemic
H1N1 influenza: the New Zealand experience. European Communicable Disease Bulletin 14 (44): 429-433.

Surveillance & Society 12(2)

208

