El

Visual Studies, Vol. 26, No. 1, March 2011

Routledqe

[\ r"yu,rr-.iic-,p

The olgorithmic turn: photosynth,

ougmented reolity
ond the chonging implicotions of the imoge
WITLIAM URICCHIO

The digital turn, and with it increased use of
lo cation - aw are technologies, has yielded innov ativ e image

applications and posed new questions about the status and
value of the image. These applications rely on
algorithmically defined relations between the viewing
subject and the world viewed, offering robust alternatives to
the visual economies of the past. If we take seriously
Heidegger's insights regardingthe Welt-bild as a metaphor

for the modern era, the algorithmic reconfiguration of
subject-object relations in this emerging visual regime
potentially offers insights through which we can reflect

upon the current era - and a metaphoric abernative. This
article uses two entry points to explore this possible
reconfiguration and, with it, the question of value.
Downloadable applications such as Photosynth aggregate
location-tagged photographs into a near-seamless whole,
and offer a way to consider such issues as collaborative

authorship of the image, unstable points of view and the
repositioning of subject-object relationships - all elements
that fundamentally challenge we ster n r epresentational
norms dominant in the modern era. In this new regime, the
spatial referents of greatest value are points of uniclueness

-

sought out and built upon by the program's algorithms
and not those perceiued by the viewer. The viewer is in turn

free to explore an extensive and dynamic image space
unconstrained by (and, indeed, without access to) an
authorised or 'correct' viewing position. A second case,
built upon certain augmented reality applications, works
by'recognising' particular spaces and, through the use of
co mputatiofi ally enhanced view ing scr eens, sup erimp o sing
new images over real space. In this case, a system of virtual
spatial annotation depends upon the'correct' positioning of
the viewer (and portable computing device) in the woild.
The two cases stand in a roughly reciprocal relationship,

turning on different notions of algorithmic intermediation
and subject-object relations and dynamics for the
generation of meaning and value.
Rien n'est plus ennuyeux qu'un paysage anonyme.
(Prosper Merim6e) I

TERMS OF ENGAGEMENT

I have long been haunted by |onathan Culler's Semiotics
of Tourism,with its careful parsing of travel vs. tourism'
its astute characterisation ofbehaviours such as our
reflexive denigration of those more tourist-like than we,
and its charting of the elusive search for authenticity
(Culler 1990). Culler traces the process by which cultural
attractions are marked as signs produced by an
international system of signification, and responsive to
and inscribed within an economic order. Yet he avoids a
blanket indictment that would read this process as the
mere flattening of the authentic into caricature,
complicit with the demands of multinational capitalism
(a charge he locates with the'sentimental nostalgia for
the organic'). His essay instead calls for an exploration of
the persistent and ubiquitous semiotic mechanisms
central to any social order, a task that this article takes
up. It is my contention that we can see evidence of
change in the dominant'semiotic mechanisms', evidence
that perhaps speaks to a deeper transformation ofthe
social order. The goal ofthis article is to explore one
aspect of that change: the algorithmic construction of
the image. While I will not take up the grander challenge
of discussing the transformation of the social order, I will
address what I take to be one of its key symptoms namely, cracks in the fagade of the subject-object
relationship characteristic of the modern era. Let me
make clear at the outset that cracks do not a
transformation make, but they give us an early warning
and an important place to look for further signs of
change.

nutshell is that over the past decade or
to new ways of
ways dependent on
the
world,
and
seeing
representing
algorithmic interventions between the viewing subject
and the object viewed. This intervention has many
manifestations, from the changed model of authorship
and expertise that Wikipedia represents over and against
the Enlightenment paradigm represented by Diderot's

My argument in

a

so we have had increased access

Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) and Professor of Comparative
include We
Media History at Utrecht University in the Netherlands. His research focuses on the emergence of media technologies and practices, and recent books
Europeans? Merlia, Representatiotxs, Identity (Chicago,2008) and Media cuhures (Heidelberg, 2006).

William Uricchio is Professor and Director of Comparative Media Studies at the

ISSN1472-586XDrirted/lssNl472-5878online/ll/010025

llo20ltlnternationalvisualsociologyAssociation

26

W. Uricchio

encyclopaedia, to the dynamic and location-aware
cartographic systems that we can find on our iPhones
and TomToms over and against the fixed cylindrical

projection grid of Gerardus Mercator's sixteenth-century
maps. In the case of the image, grosso modo, the long
regime of three-point perspective and its reification of an
underlying understanding of subject-object relations
constitute the representational order that is exhibiting
fractures. And those fractures - the topic of this article appear in the form of algorithmic visualisation systems
such as Microsoft's Photosynth and image
recognition-based augmented reality applications.

In order better to locate the terrain and implications of
this argument, we might briefly look at the larger regime
into which the algorithmic represents an incursion. Its
underlying premise can be found in Culler's assertion of
the centrality of semiotic mechanics to the social order, a
view that echoes a position developed by Heidegger in
his discussion of the Welt-bild,wherc the world as
picture'does not mean a picture of the world but the
world conceived and grasped as picture' (Heidegget 1977
[1938], 129). Heidegger goes on to specifi that the world
picture'does not change from an earlier medieval one
into a modern one, but rather the fact that the world
becomes picture at all is what distinguishes the essence of
the modern age' (Heidegger 1977 [1938], 130). For
Heidegger, the moment at which the world becomes
picture is the same moment that the human emerges as
the subject in a characteristically modern subject-object
relationship. It marks the birth of the modern. The
modern subject-object relationship takes many forms,
but can most clearly be seen in our notion of science.
Heidegger says:

We first arrive at science as research when and
only when truth has been transformed into the
certainty of representation. What it is to be is
for the first time defined as the objectiveness of
representing, and truth is first defined as the
certainty of representing, in the metaphysics of
Descartes. (Heidegger 197 7 11938), 127)

Heidegger here asserts the fundamental linkage of mode
of representation and epistemic (and social) order. The
Cartesian metaphysics to which he refers offer a widely
accepted definition for the modern project that remains
dominant today, even if under siege. In this order,

precision and exactitude as embodied in classical
mathematical physical science are essential ingredients.
Heidegger states: 'Here all events, if they are to enter at
all into representation as events of nature, must be
defined beforehand as spatiotemporal magnitudes of

motion. Such defining is accomplished through
measuring, with the help of number and calculation
(Heidegger 1977 lr938l,

ll9).

Culler's general proposition that a social order has
central'persistent and ubiquitous semiotic mechanisms'
is embodied by Heidegger's essay, which argues that the

modern social order can be defined through

a

representational system characterised by precisely
defined subject-object relations (the world as picture), a
metaphysics of exactitude and an underlying
spatiotemporal grid. Descartes himself emblematises this
order, thanks to his development of analltical geometry
and the Cartesian coordinate system that followed
(enabling geometric shapes to be described in algebraic

form). He stands for

a

notion of the modern typified by

classical cartography, three-point perspective and the

amplified point of view manifest in authorship and the
cult ofexpertise (Diderot). The broad space between
Descartes and Heidegger, despite countless historical
undulations and discoveries, turns on a consistent logic,
on something we might term the algorismic, that is, a
notion of mathematics as a language of precision, of
calculabiliry of predictability. And it remains deeply
familiar to us, pervading our lives whether through our
financial and insurance systems, our notions of science
or the construction ofour default technologies ofvisual
representation. While three-point perspective and clearly
defined subject-object relations are not inherently
algorismic, their operations are consistent with it and
depend upon its logics.
The algorismic that Descartes did so much to promote as
a mathematical system, an epistemic regime and even a
social order, and that Heidegger and others argued as a

defining characteristic of the modern era shares
etymological roots with the term algorithmic, but the
two have very different definitions and histories. In
contrast to the precision, calculability and specificity of
the algorismic, an algorithm refers to a process, a
program with clearly defined limits, a finite instruction
sequence. One is a calculable sum, whose value lies in the

correctness ofits result; the other a (finite) process> a
formula capable of accommodating different values and

yielding different results. Each term harkens back
linguistically to the great ninth-century Persian
mathematician Al-Khwarizmi, whose work appeared in
the West by the thirteenth century, and as mathematical
models, each can be traced back to the ancient Greeks.
Yet their histories differ considerably. The algorismic
predominated, enjoying a particular boost in use in the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. By contrast,
although Euclid demonstrated their operation c.300 BC,

algorithms remained

a

marginal form of calculation

The algorithmic turn: photosynth, augmented reality and the changing implications of the

image

27

until the second half of the twentieth century, when the
introduction of computers enabled the efficient

fossilised piece of Diplodocus bone. The process of
generating value through the assignment of meaning is a

processing of programs.2 The mathematical advances of
the twentieth century owe less to the arithmetic of the

familiar if complicated one, one with its own spatialities
and temporalities: the artefacts within the retail outlet,

algorismic than to the accelerated development of
algorithmic instruction sequences, a process that
continues to grow exponentially thanks to the ongoing
validity of Moore's Law. The chips in our phones,
cameras and bank cards, the supermarket'loyalty tags'
scanned as we check out, and the cookies and behaviour
tracking that companies such as Amazon and Google use
to predict and assess our interests all attest to the
pervasiveness ofan infrastructure designed to generate
data whose meanings can only be deciphered
algorithmically. And it is this algorithmic layer that
stands between the calculating subject and the object
calculated, and that refracts the subject-centred world
charted by Descartes, that merits closer inspection. Its
implications, if we take thinkers like Heidegger and
Culler seriously, can be profound.

the antique shop and the second-hand store are
distinguished by these dynamics rather than by ary
intrinsic worth. Mere purchase and ownership, no matter
how brief, can recast an object from retail to second
hand; and today's second hand in one market could
possibly be revalued as a valuable antique in another.
The image, however, has an even more multivalent
status. As an artefact, say in the form of a photograph,
the image is collectable, subject to the same ebbs and

flows in valuation as other things, particularly those
privileging symbolic and cultural attributes. Thstes, both
professional (art markets) andvernacular (eBay), help to
And, like souvenirs, the image has the
ability to link us back to the people, places and events it
represents. Its very presence attests to 'the possibility of
authentic experiences in other times and in other
set these values.

places'.

MARKING VALUE
One of the semiotic strategies that Culler discusses is the
'marker'. Drawing on Dean MacCannell's The Tourist,

Culler defines a marker

as any

kind of information or

representation

that constitutes a sight

as a

sight: by giving

information about it, representing it, making

it

recognisable. Some are'on-site' markers, such
as plaques telling that'George Washington slept
here' or that this vial of dust comes from the
moon, Some are mobile markers, such as
pamphlets and brochures designed to draw
people to the site, give information at the site,
and serve as souvenirs or representations of the
site . . .The proliferation of markers frames
something as a sight for tourists. The existence
of reproductions is what makes something an
original, authentic, the real thing - the original
ofwhich the souvenirs, postcards, statues etc.
are reproductions - and by surrounding
ourselves with reproductions we represent to
ourselves, as MacCannell astutely suggests, the

possibility of authentic experiences in other
times and in other places. (Culler 1990, 5)
Culler's essay and MacCannell's insights go a long way
towards explaining how value is created by collapsing
temporalities, overlaying a site or object in the present
with a reference to its provenance or past, or even
evoking the authentic through the act ofreproduction. A
crumbling bit of rock in one's hand transforms when we
learn that it is a piece of one of Giza's pyramids or a

But as Culler suggests, the image can also be complicit
with the valuation of its referent, the place or thing
represented. In this case, the relationship between the
image and that which it represents can be discursive,

amounting to little more than a claim; or it can work
through resemblance, something that we simply
recognise or take as recognising. The space between the
two is slippery and sometimes fraught. Iust as the claim
that a piece of stone is from Cheops'pyramid changes
the stone's status, so too the (discursive) claim that a
photograph is ofa particular place constructs its
(representational) meaning. Claims are not always
accurate; film and television directors routinely move
between these two modes of assigning meaning,
establishing a location through resemblance - iconic
shots of a particular place such as Manhattan - only to
cut to shots taken in less expensive locations such as
Toronto or Pittsburgh as if the same location. This
technique of using discursive strategies to evoke
representational assumptions was explored by early
Soviet fi.lmmaker Lev Kuleshov, who argued that at least
in the sequential image flow of film, meaning is
constructed by the relationship of one shot to the next
rather than firlly residing within any one image.

- and destabilisation - of meaning can
occur within the realm of the image, as Kuleshov and his

The assignment

followers argued; and theorists such as Culler have
extended the argument, turning it on a different sort of
framing, but nevertheless undercutting the assumed
stability of imagistic representation and meaning by
looking outside it, at the broader signifying context. And

28

W. Uricchio

more recently, theorists such as Tim Ingold and Sarah
Pink have sharpened the critique by addressing factors
such as multisensory settings, movement and place,
reminding us that there is more to the image than meets
the eye. The idea of the image as'becoming'through
movement - movement of the world, movement of the
(photographing) subject and movement even of the
subsequent viewer

-

is taken up and developed

in Sarah

Pink's contribution to this issue, and will resonate with
the algorithmic applications to which we will shortly

turn.
The paradox of the image as a site of meaning and value
turns on its reciprocal relationship to the object or place
photographed. As discussed, sometimes the location can
give the image its significance, and sometimes, as Culler
notes, the image can give the location its meaning.

Functioning somewhat differently than a replica - say' a
miniature Eiftel Tower, which can be seen from any angle
and still maintain the legibility of its link to the real thing
- the image carries with it a more constrained sense of
representation. An extreme close-up of one of the tower's

and reassembles the images into a near-seamless
composite. Viewers can then explore the assembled
three-dimensional photographic space in almost any

direction (including in depth), with Seadragon
technology enabling instant high-definition access to
whatever portion of the whole is on the screen. This both
precludes any feeling of zooming into an existing picture
(a situation in which granularity increases and the
authoritative status of the original composition is
reinforced) and facilitates the transition from one
image-space to another. The overlays and transitions
from one image to the next are discernible but not
obtrusive, and as a viewing option, the contours of the
original photographs can be marked with white lines
('quads') for navigational purposes (viewers can also see
all of the individual photographs laid out side by side if
they would like, as well as different angles of the point
cloud). Users can build their own'synths' by surfing the
web or particular sites such as Flickr, and tagging images
with a particular location ('Piazza San Marco in Venice')
or event ('Obama's inauguratiori). Synths can be

beams would not necessarily convey the meaning 'Eiffel

constructed with between dozens o( and even several
hundred, photographs; for the moment, Microsoft

Tower'; it could only do this by relying exclusively on
discursive claims, Moreover, even at the representational
Ievel, where what we would see is a beam or metal

recommends staying below a 600-photograph limit since
the strain on the system's processing power visibly
interferes with the experience. Available to the public

surface, assuming that either was recognisable, we would
still have to rely on a discursive claim to distinguish rhls

since 2008, Photosynth's capacities seem to be

beam or surface from any other metal beams or similarly
'surfaced
objects. And such an image, no matter how
much one proclaimed its indexical status, would have a
diffrcult time conveying value back to the object. At least

synthing of different images introduced in 2010.

when its representational capacities are being called upon
(as distinct from its cultural value as art), the value and
meaning of a photographic image are constrained by the
viewer's ability to recognise and make visual correlations
between the two-dimensional image and the thing
represented. And in this particular game, convention and

point of view matter, strategies that have been finely
honed and codified in the course of the modern era, and
that are part and parcel of a particular way of seeing and
being in the world. Photosgrth and certain augmented

reality applications offer some intriguing variations on
this process, and in so doing, raise some fundamental
questions about our visual regime.

MOVEMENT WITHIN THE IMAGE: PHOTOSYNTH
Photosynth (www.photosynth.net), a software
application developed in part by Noah Snavley
(PhotoTourism) at the University of Washington and
acquired and further developed by Microsoft, essentially
analyses digital images for sites of uniqueness, generates
a three-dimensional point cloud of the represented space

developing steadily, with major improvements in the

In the Photosynth website's words
(http: / /photoslnth.net/about.aspx)

:

Photosynth takes your photos, mashes them
together and recreates a 3D scene out ofthem
that anyone can view and move around in.
Different than static photos and video, Photos1,nth allows you to explore details of places,
objects, and events unlike any other media. You
can't stop video, move around and zoom in to
check out the smallest details, but with
Photosynth you can. And you can't look at a
photo gallery and immediately see the spatial
relation between the photos, but with
Photosynth you can.
Very much a work in progress, Photosyntlls status as a
medium also seems to be in formation, and this
description suggests its sites of slippage relative to
existing media forms. It manages to wed place and

movement through its'point cloud'- a
three-dimensional configuration of sites of visual
uniqueness upon which the images are arranged and
through which movement is facilitated - a logic with
implications that might best be approached by

The algorithmic turn: photosynth, augmented reality and the changing implications of the image

considering Photosynth's limit cases. The system rs
predicated upon the visual contours ofplace. Like a
jigsaw puzzle, it works from known or given points, and
extends outwards, building an ever-changing whole by
aligning the points of different images and suturing them
together. Unlike aptzzle, however, Photosynth addresses
a third dimension, and therefore must confront the issue

of significant overlap among its images. Since the synths
are composited from digital photographs, some of their
challenges regard such formative elements as image
contrast ratio, composition (angle, proximity, focus) and

29

of a Photosynth application that addresses this problem
is CNN's appropriately titled'The Moment', a synth of
628 user-submitted photographs of the moment that
President Obama took his oath of ofi6ce. Although many
ofthe photographs are ofthe inauguration itself, large
portions of the synthed image include crowds of
onlookers, dignitaries and even musicians. 'The
Moment' actually reveals quite a bit of temporal slippage
- changes in bodily position, different configurations of
the flags in the wind and so on. The constants, the point

lens characteristics, all ofwhich are capable ofrendering

clouds, seem to be grounded in architectural detail and
the configuration of the podium more than anything

points of uniqueness in ways that the system cannot

else, and the

recognise. If an extreme close-up of several mosaic pieces

crowd, the more one is reminded

Marco's basilica is tagged and fed into

from San
it may or may not be accepted, depending upon the

a synth,

certainty of its location as extrapolated through the

point cloud. If its pattern is distinctive, allowing it to frt
uniquely within other shots of the sarne area, then it will
probably be accepted, allowing the synth s user to
traverse the plaza even to the point of a close-up of the
mosaics. Shots that, because of extreme angles or
distorting lenses or lighting confi.gurations, are
unrecognised are simply not successfrrlly synthed. These
tolerances express the operations ofthe underlying
algorithm, reflect the current state of the navigational
interface and attest to particular conventions regarding
imagistic correctness - and they seem quite dynamic,
since the capacities of the system grow ever more refined.
As might be expected, Photosynth does particularly well

with architectural environments: stability is a plus and
facilitates the construction of point clouds. However, it
also yields impressive results in nature. Rather more
dynamic than the relative stasis of architecture, nature
raises the larger issue of duration. What happens to the
points of uniqueness in a forest when blowing wind, or
plant growth, or seasonal changes alter the configuration
of leaves and branches? One can find quite impressive
synths of forests on Photosynttt's site, but most share
tranquil conditions and a small temporal window, and
presumably make good use of this relative stasis. But we
might put the question to architectural spaces as well.
Mixing images taken during the day and at night will
result in a high percentage of rejected images, but what
about shots taken before and after, say, a war or an
earthquake? New chips on a surface or distorted corners
of buildings, windows or bricks complicate the
construction of a point cloud, exposing the system's
durational tolerances and rendering its embrace of
historicity ambivalent at best.
At the other end of the spectrum, what about the
'transient, the fleeting, the contingent'that Baudelaire
ascribes to the modern? The most widely seen example

more one examines close shots of the

of

early-nineteenth-century photography, where long time
exposures often resulted in ghost fi.gures. These fugitive
images emerged from the gaze locked within three-point
perspective and subject to the limits of early
photochemical emulsions. With Photosynth, a different
mechanism is at play: the tolerances of algorithmic
reassembly; but the ephemeral, nevertheless, seem to
pose a very real challenge to the system.
Photosynth permits one to 'wander'through the
depicted space, moving deeper into (or farther back

from) the frame and exploring off-screen space, whether
to the Ieft or right, or the top or bottom of the initial
frame. Indeed, the frame (of the computer screen) is
rendered arbitrary, like the lens of a magnifying glass in
relationship to a newspaper or the viewfrnder of a
telescope to the night sky. As the Photosynth
advertisement notes, the sense of mobility and
user-generated interactivity within the image-space
challenges our inherited definitional assumptions of
photography. But it does something more, restoring an
experience of movement to the image and the depiction
process, vividly illustrating the arbitrary constraints of
any one image within a larger reality. Much like Sarah
Pinks discussion of Google Street Views in this issue
(also an algorithmically enabled application),
Photosynth assembles points and enables movement
within and among them, offering us different ways of
displaying and engaging with visual information. But
beyond Photosynth's ability to do this dynamically and
in three dimensions, the application distinguishes itself
through its subverting of any particular point of view, in
the process disrupting the modern configuration of the
subject-object relationship, as well as its reliance on
collaborative authorship. Let us take these factors in

turn.
Consider Canaletto's painting Piazza San Marco with the
Basilica (1730). An impressive display of three-point
perspective, the basilica is at the centre of the frame, and
the lines provided by the Procuratie Vecchio and

30

W. Uricchio

{

FGUREl. PiazzaSanl\"4arcowiththeBosilica,byCanaletto, 1730.FoggArtl\4useum,Cambridge,MA

Procuratie Nuovo, as well as the gutters in the plaza,
literally map out Canaletto's sight lines. The
representation is completely stable, the geometries a
testament to the algorismic regime of fixity and
precision. There is one and only one position from
which the image's geometries work, and the viewer and
artist share that point ofview Photosynth, by contrast,
draws on some 600 photographs taken from different
positions, angles and distances, and with an array of
lenses. The user can navigate within and among these, in
the process discovering many well-composed images and
new ways of seeing the plaza and its buildings. But there
is no correct or authorised viewing position, no 'master

recomposition.
Instead, there is simply a three-dimensional space made
up of many textures and granularities, and the means to
move within it. Whereas in Canaletto's case, the
subject-object relationship is geometrically fixed, in
Photosynth's dlmamic assemblage the relationship is
unstable, subject to the whims of the user and the
capacities of the algorithmic. We can move within and
across particular points ofview confront radical shifts in
angle and inhabit a visual cacophony bound together by
a point cloud that enables our viewing position. While it
is certainly the case that the individual images that make

shot'within which everything

else is a

up the synth each largely embody the conventions of
three-point perspective - something inscribed in the
lenses that most cameras come equipped with, and
something basic to our cultural notions of visual

legibility - I wish to call attention to the fabric of radical
disjunctures in viewing position and the fundamentally
unstable nature of the composite. In Photosynth, many
points of view are called upon, and inscribed into an
algorithmically dynamic mix. Like Wikipedia entries, the
whole only works because of individual contributions acts of authorship, bits of information, points of view that are algorithmically reworked into an ever-changing

mix. Rather than relying on the expertise and reputation
of one known individual, the reader must take a more
active role in making sense of the ensuing composite of
anonymous voices, in assessing it, in moving across its
links to pursue additional information. The work of
individuals - whether in the Wikipedia entry or in the
photographic contribution to a particular synth - is
theoretically traceable, but the larger mix supersedes and
largely effaces those traces, enabling something like a
collective point of view in which the user's agency and
actions are paramount.
The organisational logic ofthe synth depends neither on
any one person's perspective (d la Canaletto), nor on
multiple people's perspectives (even though these are the

imagistic building blocks of synth), nor even on the
navigational prowess of the end user. Instead, they
depend on an algorithmic intervention. The selection of
which images are in or out, of how they are spatially
arranged, of which points offer access to which image all
reflect the interplay of algorithmically determined points
of uniqueness, on the one hand'skinned'with
photographic information, and on the other'activated'
by the navigational work of the user. This intervention
stands in sharp contrast to Canaletto's painting, which
embodies the subject-object relationship emblematic of
the modern era, the relationship charted by Descartes
and manifest in Heidegger'sWelt-bild. The viewing
subject inscribes her position, her subjectiviry in the
calculus through which the object is apprehended and
represented. Three-point perspective is the technique by
which this relationship is visually expressed; it serves as
the language of this relationship and the guarantor of its
stability. Photosynth, by contrast, is enabled through an
algorithmic intervention in the subject-and-object
relationship. A process ofneither the subject's nor the
object's making determines point of access, sights seen,

71rc

algorithmic turn: photosynth, augmented reality and the changing implications of the image

FIGURE

2. Photosynth imaqe of

31

Piazza San Marco, Venice. Avallable on ine at

http:// photosynth.net/view.aspx?cid:c8c6203d-c36

1

-4700-a343 2a5cd0c06013.

lens or on a

connections made, experience gained. This is done, in a
manner of speaking, in collaboration with both the

information that can only be

subject and the object. But the effect undermines the
unity of the viewing position hard-wired into Canaletto's
painting, in which we see the Piazzafrom Canaletto's

although camera-equipped cell phones and handhelds
currently predominate, head-mounted displays - glasses
- are already on the market, and working prototypes of
retinal displays are now in the laboratories). The
informational overlay is tagged to particular places in the
world, and at the moment, three different systems may
be used to link the real and the virtual. First, fiduciary
markers are the most basic, consisting of graphically
coded tags that physically attached to the object for
which an overlay is sought. The device's recognition of
the code triggers the appearance ofthe data layer in its
screen, like the other systems, treating the information or
image as spatially substantial (one may, in effect, walk
around a virtual object as ifit physically exists). Second,
currently the dominant application, digital compass
tracking systems essentially offer a kind of triangulation
process using geo-positioned data and GPS (Global

perspective. In Photosynth's case, while we are aware of
seeing through many complementary sets of eyes, the
enabler of those viewpoints and of the larger composite
remains unseen and out of reach. It is a program layer
that changes, that is redefined, that offers different
affordances - in addition to being the single conduit

through which we can access the image - while being
completely outside the control of the user.
Authorship, in this context, is both problematic and
pluriform. Although mostly effaced, it is the author of
the individual photographs; largely enacted, it is the
author ofthe experience - that is, the navigating user;
fundamentally enabling, it is the author of the algorithm;
and in terms of what we actually see and select from, it is
the algorithm as author. Descartes'triumphant subject
and the Icfo implied in Heidegger's Welt-bild are not
eradicated, for their traces remain abundant. Rather,
they are fundamentally repositioned by the algorithmic
regimes that now stand between subject and object.

seen

through

a

screen (viewing technologies are quickly developing, and

Positioning System), a compass and an accelerometer.

Wikitude, for example, calculates users'positions by
using these elements, linking them together with the
Wikitude data set to provide geographic information
(e.g. longitude and latitude), history and information
regarding points of interest. Finally, natural feature
tracking systems represent a fast-emerging image

IMAGES IN MOTION: AUGMENTED REALITY

technology that assigns data to location by making visual
correlations between physical places (i.e.'recognising'

Algorithms take many forms, and no digital camera or
computer-based viewing system would be complete
without them. But I would like to turn to a particular
application that contrasts in important ways with
Photosynth: location-based augmented reality (AR). AR
systems overlay existing physical reality with an
additional (augmented) layer, making visible

them) and the information to be appended. An
image-recognition system, it requires the user to position
sights within a viewfinder, which the algorithms then
process to find any correlations with the stored database.
The system's search for unique identity points is
conceptually related to Photosynttis, except that in this
case, the user is in the physical world attempting to

32

W. Uricchio

correlate real and virtual data in order to trigger a virtual
graphic overlay. For the moment, natural feature

can only work if certain imaging rules are followed,

tracking's intensive processing demands have limited its
use to powerfrrl handhelds and relatively iconic locations,

is

but among industry insiders, it seems to be the
application ofchoice.

assuming that the AR user has specific goals in mind and

not'just exploringl Unlike Photosynth, however,

even

if the user is 'just exploring', the resulting information in
AR systems is quite specific, with meaning assigned to
particular locations and information provided that can
serve as incentives to act (in the case of retail businesses,

Augmented reality applications such as Layar

(http://wwwlayar.com I ) and Wikitude

(http://wwwwikitude.org/), even though they use
digital compass and not natural feature tracking,
illustrate the uses of AR. They can overlay dynamically
responsive information on the screen of the handheld;

point out the locations of any particular sort of business,
displaying them as overlays in the device's screen, linking
those locations to web-based information repositories
and providing travel instructions; give visual access to a
world of3D user-generated fantasy characters that
co-inhabit real space; and offer data overlays regarding
underground infrastructure such as water, sewage and
electrical conduits. The AR sector has experienced
exponential investment growth over the past year or two,
since most smart phones now have the requisite
navigation devices and AR applications turn on simple
(and free) software downloads. This growth has also
been driven by the advertising industry, which sees AR
applications as 'the next big thingl However, more
creative and interventionist applications have also been
on the rise, giving users, for example, the ability to
overlay commercial billboards with art projects or
critical commentary, or to serve as tools for game play.
These latter, more dynamic and even spontaneous
applications point to the reason that natural feature
tracking is preferred over other systems. If an art project
seeks to overlay something relatively ephemeral such as
Burger King's billboard advertisements and signs with a
different graphic and logo (one of fulian Oliver's

artvertising endeavours), the AR system must be able
simply to recognise the graphic form rather than relying
upon previously annotated GPS coordinates (something
unlikely in this scenario).
My interest in natural feature tracking AR systems turns
both on their temporal characteristics (their potential to
embrace the ephemeral), and on their spatial
requirements (the device-equipped human must be
physically positioned in a particular way in order to get

particular information). The requirements for physical
positioning are quite specific - point the camera at the
wrong location, use an unusual angle or an inappropriate
time of day, and you will get other-than-expected results.
In this, natural feature tracking AR systems share
something with Photosynth s image requirements, where
the assignment and alignment of points of uniqueness

coupons might appear, or contact information, store
hours and location instructions).
The act of mediated looking in AR systems - that is,
looking through the camera of the handheld computing

- is also always an algorithmically enabled
navigational act. Through the lens of the AR-activated
device, there is no such thing as an innocent gaze: the act
device

of gazing and the views consequently seen are
transformed into a process of signifi.cation as images are
laden with particular meanings. Paul Virilio has
described a related, if far more extreme, phenomenon in
his characterisation of sight-activated missile guidance
systems, where seeing is synonymous with targeting

(Virilio

-

1989). The innocence of uninformed exploration

something hypothetically possible with Photosynth

-

is

transformed into an encounter with the
always-already-marked and significant. The user sets the
parameters of signification, be they social (are any of my
friends around?), cultural (tourist information once
found in travel guides is now location-bound) or
commercial (where's the nearest Starbucks?).
The differences between the two systems are striking. In
the case of Photosynth, we move within a virtual
image-space generated by the algorithmic assemblage of
many points of view, many authors and even many
times. And we do so presumably from a position of

relative bodily stasis, sitting behind our computers. In
the case of the AR systems under consideration, we move

in the physical world, our movements and positioning
tracked and algorithmically processed. The handheld
device, our interface to the world, is both the agency of
that tracking and the means of the augmented world's
appearance. Point of view is embodied, constant, and
synonymous with the viewing subject. Rather than
wandering through a virtual image-space made up of
many different points of view, we bridge the physical
world with a virtual image-space that embodies one
point of view: the algorithmically modulated viewing
subject. Both Photosynth and the AR applications at
hand require that we take the dlmamic character of the
image as given. Whether lacking a dominant point of
view (Photosynth) or embodied in a particular point of
view (AR), movement is an expected experiential
dimension: movement within the image (Photosynth) or
the image in motion (AR). Movement in Photosynth is

The algorithmic turn: photosynth, augmented reality and the changing implications of the

image

33

limited to the virtual world, but opens up the possibility

subject-object relations would also miss Heidegger's

of 'seeing through many different points of view,
through other authors' eyes. By contrast, movement in
the AR domain is sited within the physical world,
embedded in a multisensory environmental mix of
sounds, smells and presences, but point of view is
ultimately limited to that of the viewing subject.

point about theWelt-bild. The fundamental reworking of
our position as subjects vis-i-vis the world in this new
algorithmically enabled era, with all of its many
affordances and challenges, may well in itself suggest
aspects of an emerging new order, one in which
processual intermediation repositions the old certainties.
We are moving from the Welt-bild emblematised by

The construction of meaning, too, functions quite
differently between the tlvo systems. Photosynths enter
the world framed by meaning in the sense that they bear
descriptions, are reinforced and built by image tagging,
and, depending on their topic, bring with them the

cultural baggage of the ensemble - whether PiazzaSarr
Marco or Obama's inauguration. That framing gives way
to an experiential domain in which countless other vistas
and associations may be generated, since the system gives
access to up to 600 or so points ofview plus the
interpretive frames and interests that the user brings to
bear in interacting with them. The 'steering' mechanism
is simply the interaction among the user, the coded
source material and the enabling algorithm in the

intervening data organisation and navigation system. In
the case of location-based AR applications, meanings are
as precise as the viewing position. Places are dynamically
tagged with particular data almost simultaneously with
the act of viewing, and these tags can in turn be linked to
deeper data repositories (websites) and even other links
(telephone connections), reaffirming the assignment of
meaning to place. AR systems effectively overlay the
viewer's access to the physical world with specific (and
selectable) grids of signification.

Canaletto's Piazza San Marco to the very different logics
and subject positions of Photosynth, Google Street View,
augmented reality and their ilk.

PERSPECTIVE

Let us return to Culler's notion of the marker - 'any kind
of information or representation that constitutes a sight
as a sight, giving information about it, representing it,

making it recognisable'. We might also say that it
constitutes a site as a sight, transforming space into
place. And it is a site of value. In the two rather divergent
algorithmic applications that we have considered, we
have seen different approaches to the economy ofthe
image. In one case, linguistic tags ('Obama's
inauguration ) begin a sorting process that is carried on
by algorithmic analysis of the image, and its dissection
and reassembly as a navigable point cloud. Human
tagging and algorithmic processing both mark and
construct a coherent image-space, with Photosynth
aggregating different points of view, and enabling the
user to wander among them. In the other case, locations

in the physical world

are

virtually marked and given

signifi.cance. Augmented reality systems create a window
Yet

for all oftheir differences, applications like

Photosynth and augmented reality share a frrndamental
realignment of subject-object relations thanks to their
algorithmic processing layer. As stated earlier, this does
not preclude human ageflcy, nor the stubborn fixities of
the world viewed. Rather, it resituates them, defining
their parameters and enabling their interactions. And
although difficult to'see' (after all, we attend to the
images before us and not to the underlying selection and
organisation process), the algorithmic domain ultimately
determines what we see, and even how we see it. There is
a great temptation to rearticulate this as a form of 'old
school' ideology, a distorting screen between us and the
world, but this would be incorrect. For starters, it would
imply the existence of an ideology-free past, somehow
claiming that when subjects and objects met directly,
unencumbered by the unseen hand of the algorithm, the
world was a transparent place and its rule set visible to
all. The long modern era of the algorismic was no less
ideologically complicit. The flauening of the algorithmic
and the ideological in the case ofrepositioned

into this rich overlay of data and meaning, revealing the
locations of banks and pharmacies, apartments for rent
and T-mobile hot spots, virtual artworks and
location-based historical data. The algorithmically
enabled interplay between the viewer's position in the
physical world and this virtual information layer is
transformative, creating sites of meaning and enabling

action.
One is tempted to call upon the distinctions drawn
between travel and tourism that Culler charts - one an
open and unstructured experience, with signification
arising from new and unexpected ways of seeing; the
other, carefirlly charted and well-labelled, fixed in

semiotic import, with the path from one sight to another
well-marked, and commodifi.cation often lurking nearby.
But Culler is too intelligent a critic to settle for such
essential definitions. He complicates these distinctions,
pointing instead to shifting regimes of definitional
referents, to an ages-old dynamic that elevates one
experience at the expense ofthe other, destabilising any
intrinsic meaning and pointing instead to a larger

34

W. Uricchio

dynamic. Both modes of engagement have historically
struggled over the notion of the authentic. Deployment
patterns of the term suggest that its meanings are highly
relative, with the pot calling the kettle black when it
comes to authentic encounters vs. tourism. Defi.nitional
relativism aside, times have changed. The notion of the
authentic in the age of the modern, where subjects and
objects encountered one another in relative peace,
should probably be reconceptualised in an age where
algorithmic interventions have modified the agency and
place of both. The project of postmodernism might be
read as the beginnings ofsuch an endeavour. Culler
reminds us that the authentic is not something
unmarked or undifferentiated, but rather, that
authenticity is a sign relation. And in so reminding us, he
offers a possible way out of this dilemma. Culler says:
A semiotic perspective advances the study of
tourism by preventing one from thinking of
signs and sign relations as corruptions of what
ought to be a direct experience of reality and
thus of saving one from the simplistic
firlminations against tourists and tourism that
are symptoms of the touristic system rather
than pertinent analyses. Tourism, in turn,
enriches semiotics in its demonstration that
salient features ofthe social and natural world
are articulated by what Percy calls 'symbolic
complexes' and its revelation of the modern
quest for experience as a quest for an experience
ofsigns. Its illustration ofthe structural
incompleteness of experience, its dependency
on markers, helps us understand something
the nature of semiotic structures. (Culler

of

If the algorithmic reworking of subject-object
relationships were simply limited to Photosynth and AR,
the response would be simple. But the structural

similarities in terms of algorithmic intermediation, a
reconfiguration of subject-object relations, and new
dynamics for the generation of meaning and value that
can be found in such diverse applications as Wikipedia,
dynamic cartographic interfaces, taste recommendation
systems (Amazon), Google AdSense, even automatic
stock market trading all suggest that something larger is
at stake. These developments are but fissures in the
still-robust ramparts of the modern. The stable subject
position inscribed into three-point perspective and
emblematised by Heidegger as the Welt-bild retain their
cultural taken-for-grantedness. The arithmetic precision
of the algorismic remains the basis of our currencies and
economic lives. But as we explore the new affordances of
the algorithmic, and as our capacities to deploy them
grow in tandem with the progression of Moore's Law we
might also begin to reflect more critically about the
differences in emerging modes of representation. If
nothing more, these differences offer compelling
heuristic entry points to interrogate our assumptions
regarding representation and to reflect upon the
implications of the alternatives.

NOTES
II

1990, 9)
Perhaps the algorithmic can benefi.t from a similar

insight. Although of

implications of either stance for our understanding of
the visual, its relations to the subject and the parameters
of its valuation and significance remain profound.

a

different order than the clearly

defined subject-object binary that characterised the
modern era for the last few hundred years, the
algorithmic turn remains rooted in human experiential
and semiotic practices. On one hand, that element of
human continuity might override newly emerging
disruptive potentials, helping us instead to locate and
assess the alterations to our established modes of
interaction and being in the world, and make creative use
of them. At a moment of transition, it is difflcult to tell
whether this is simply a default mode - the momentum
of the past - or if it reveals a level of adaptive insight part of the same fabric of imagination that creates and
uses these new affordances. On the other hand, perhaps
we are indeed approaching a signifi.cant turn in our

organisation and use ofdata, and these new applications
can both demonstrate and enable an underlying
collaborative symbolic and experiential domain outside
the tradition ofthe transcendent subject. The

]

[2]

'Nothing is more boring than an unnamed landscape'
(Culler 1990, 6).
A long and interesting histor,v of efforts to work with
algorithms pre-dates the computer era. The work of
Leibnitz (1956) and Harsd6rffer ( 1971), among others,
greatly complicates the simple biturcation I have
heuristically asserted in this article. For a compelling
discussion, see Trettien 2009.

REFERENCES
CNN. 2009 The moment. http://edition.cnn.com/SPECIALS/
2009 I

44.president/inauguration/themoment/.

Culler, I. 1990. Framing the sign: Criticism and its institutions.
Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.

http://www.scribd.com/doc/ 36984937 I cullerl.
Harsdorffer, Georg Philipp. 1971. Poetischer Trichter; Die
Teutsche Dicht - Und Reimkunst, Ohne Behuf Der
Lateinischen Sprache, in VL Stunden Einzugiessen [A poetic
funnel for infusing the art of German poetry and rhyme in
six hours, without benefit of Latin languagel . Hildesheim
and New York: G. O1ms.

The algorithmic turn: photosynth, augmented reality and the changing implications of the

Heidegger,

In
essays,
New York Harper

M. 1977 [1938]. The age of the world picture.

volvelles: An archaeology of text-generating mechanisms.

Torchbooks.
In
Philosophical papers and letters,2nd ed., edited and
translated by Leroy E. Loemker. Boston: D. Holland.

Leibniz, G. W. 1956. On the general characteristic.

35

MacCannell, D. 1976. The tourist. New York Schocken.
Trettien, W. 2009. Computers, cut-ups, & combinatory

The Question Concerning Technology anil other

translated and edited by William Lovitt.

image

MSc thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

'

http://whitneyannetrettien.com/thesis/.

Virilio,

P. 1989. War and cinema: The logistics of perception.

London: Verso.

