Ethnomethodological Architectures: Information Systems Driven by Cultural and Community VisionsRamesh SrinivasanDepartment of Information Studies, University of California, Los Angeles, GSE&IS, Ofﬁce 220, 300 Young Drive North, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1520. E-mail srinivasan@gseis.ucla.eduAs networked digital systems are rapidly created and de- ployed, social, cultural, and community-focused issues are often neglected. Indeed much research has focused on the “effects” these systems hold, rather than viewing systems as tools to be designed given an understanding of sociocultural context. Acknowledging the cultural practices and belief systems of a set of users may allow systems to be more effectively created and deployed into particular contexts. Emerging research in commu- nity information systems and archives has highlighted possible interactions between system design and ethno- graphic research. These bridges include understanding how communities can begin (1) to create content for their own information systems, (2) to design the database ar- chitectures, and (3) to integrate systems within community infrastructures. In this article, I allude to several cultural criticisms that accompany the global proliferation of information technologies. These criticisms can be an- swered by research that focuses on developing systems based on ethnographic insights. Speciﬁcally, I present the research example of Tribal Peace, a cultural information system designed for and by community members of the 19 Native American reservations of San Diego County (California, United States). This case has demonstrated the potential for a community to create an information system that satisﬁes its own priorities. This precedent points to the need for further research that investigates this convergence.IntroductionNetworked technological systems, because of their global accessibility and cultural impact (Castells, 2001), have raised signiﬁcant questions of content and classiﬁcation. These include the question of who produces information for these systems and which standards are being circulated to classify this content. Consequently, scholars have begun to investigate the convergences between media technologies and communities. This process has involved studies of vir- tual communities that are formed and connected solely on Received October 18, 2005; revised April 25, 2006; accepted June 7, 2006© 2007 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. Published online 9 February 2007 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com). DOI: 10.1002/asi.20544the basis of the networked media environment in which they meet (Preece, 2000; Rheingold, 1993), as well as research focused on creating digital systems to serve perceived ethnic or cultural needs. Because information systems have been criticized as systems of cultural imposition (Sassen, 1997), the question of whether systems that are driven by community needs and discourses can be developed has been raised. Such systems would allow the technology to serve the community’s infrastructures and be created from an ethnomethodological framework (Crabtree, 1998; Crabtree et al., 2000; Garﬁnkel, 1967). It has also been hypothesized that such systems may sustainably be used and adopted within diverse cultural con- texts (Srinivasan, 2006b).Developing information systems from within this frame- workmayprovidearesponsetomanyofthejustiﬁedcriticisms of blind technological deployment; that theme forms the basis of this article.BackgroundNetworked information systems allow for (1) preserva- tion via storage of data and content within a series of data- base architectures and (2) dissemination and communication of information via digital networks and a client-server archi- tecture that can be harnessed and written to by individuals in a spatially distributed audience. Cyberinfrastructures have proliferated (Borgman, 2000), and social network literature has emerged in scholarly material (Wellman, 2001). These developments have signiﬁcantly impacted notions of com- munity and culture from a traditional idea that geographical locality equates to community (Appadurai, 1998a, 1998b; Ginsburg et al., 2002).Scholarly research has begun to focus on the cultural implications of global ﬂows of information and capital. These dynamics have created stratiﬁcations that point to global unevenness in terms of technology access and authorship. These disjunctures have existed for years (Appadurai, 1998a, 1998b) yet continue to widen as more powerful technologies are introduced. The differences between the “haves” and “have nots” are likely to increase. With these points in mind,JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, 58(5):723–733, 2007efforts to respond to the “digital divide” are in place. Digital divide initiatives, much as many community-oriented infor- mation projects, tend to focus on providing communities with technology access yet often fail to consider the speciﬁc goals articulated by communities themselves.Content and CommunityThe concept of community has been shifted via the emer- gence of such information systems. A rich diversity of online communities has emerged, and meaningful research has fo- cused on the elements of sociability and usability fostered in these spaces (Kim, 2000; Preece, 2000). Online community is a term that is understood differently across the many dis- ciplines that share an interest in the topic. Whittaker, Isaacs, and O’Day have identiﬁed the following core characteristics of online communities (Whittaker, Isaacs, & O’Day, 1997):Member maintenanace of shared goals/interests/needs Member engagement in repeated, active participation Member access to shared resourcesReciprocity of information, support, and servicesShared context of social conventions, language, and protocolsAn online community is not deﬁned as a community that only meets via an information system, but one in which com- munication and sharing of resources are connected to a shared technology. Wellman argues (Wellman, 2001) that computer networks are social networks and online communi- ties maintain the potential for creation of strong ties through which ongoing emotional support is provided and weak ties through which distinct and potentially valuable nonredundant information may be accessed (Granovetter, 1973). Online communities have emerged in diverse scenarios with different purposes. Basic categories include the following:Virtual communities (of interest and in general): Virtual communities are constituted without explicit acknowledg- ment of physical geography or copresence. Interest-based communities would be focused on a speciﬁc topic, such as cooking or a baseball team, while general communities aim to build emergent connections from heterogeneous members who simply wish to socialize online. Although some have celebrated the power of virtual communities to form and sustain themselves solely in cyberspace (Rheingold, 1993), other researchers fear that the proliferation of such commu- nities may negate the value of the physical world and civic urban communities through a process of cyberbalkanization (Putnam, 2000). These critiques may be overstated in their portrayal of this geographic negation, as the choice remains for community members to maintain their “physical afﬁlia- tions” while they are online. The inclusion of school informa- tion, city of residence, and so on, via such online communities as Friendster and MySpace is reﬂective of virtual communi- ties that are fundamentally focused on sociability rather than the forced topicality of speciﬁc interests.Physical communities supported by an online network: These are online communities that are speciﬁcally tied to a physical location. Notable examples of such communitiesinclude the Seattle Community Network and the Blacksburg Electronic Village. Such geographically tied communities have proliferated throughout the wired world (Carroll & Rosson, 2001).Communities of practice: Emerging from Wenger’s (1998) descriptions, these are communities for professionals and others dedicated to the sharing of resources. Roles are de- ﬁned yet ﬂuid; purposes and goals are less ﬂuid and ﬁxed. Ethnic/political communities: These are communities that may have no proximity, yet have a common political identity or ethnic background. A variety of Web sites have been designed to allow these groups to join together. Such online communities exist to unite diasporic immigrant groups, allow dialogue among those who are dispersed and disenfranchised, and catalyze processes of preservation and cultural communi- cation. Previous research has pointed to the possibilities of enabling culturally differentiated discourses to empower online communities (Srinivasan, 2004), and the centerpiece example of this article will attempt to extend such research. The study presented in this article is of a community of Native American reservations. Because these groups maintain a common cultural ancestry and similar political priorities, this article focuses on a community that is ethnic/political.Activity-based communities: These communities are de- ﬁned by a shared activity such as shopping, making music, or playing games.Authorship and Participatory InvolvementThe research presented in this article focuses on the ethnic/political community; it attempts to understand how such communities can author, design, and adopt information systems to serve their speciﬁc cultural activities.A number of community information projects have en- gaged communities beyond the traditional classical ethno- graphic understandings of “studying” the cultural environment in measurable, quantitative manners (positivist) or describing the culture in its most “normal” state (normativity). A num- ber of such projects have focused on eliciting community stories/oral histories and expression; they are described as cultural storytelling systems, in which different community- created pieces are collected in an online system. An example is the Story Corps project (http://storycorps.net/), whose goal is to exhibit “extraordinary stories from ordinary peo- ple.” Built around a set of sound recording booths placed at various public spaces, including New York’s Grand Central Terminal, the project presents the ability to provide oral nar- ratives that are then presented as part of a system housed at the Library of Congress’s Center for American Folklife.While Story Corps is notable for its emphasis on collec- tion from many voices through oral and visual recording, it focuses on “nation” as a construct, rather than a speciﬁc ethnic, local, or linguistic community. Other projects in this vein have centered on using technology to preserve stories and cultural material within speciﬁc communities. The Gnawa Stories project (http://www.ibiblio.org/gnawastories/), based on the mystical healers of Morocco, is one interesting effort that has attempted to describe collected content about this community through the categories History, Rituals, Portraits,JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—March 2007 DOI: 10.1002/asiand Travels. In soliciting community-created content, these projects are noteworthy; however, even within such projects it remains unclear how deeply different sectors of community are engaged and whether these systems truly allow knowledge to be circulated or preserved within a community.Although these projects have allowed community voices to emerge online, authorship is but one step in a participa- tory design process (Bodker, 1996; Bodker & Gronbaek, 1996; Kyng, 1995; Reardon, 1998) in which end users are actively engaged in collaboration with researchers in the de- sign of the technology. The engagement of the user or com- munity as the designer has had demonstrable consequences for aiding systems in serving the speciﬁc needs of their users (Bishop, Mehra, Bazzell, & Smith, 2000; Harris, Weiner, Warner, & Levin, 1995; Kyng, 1995). For example, the Afya Project, dedicated to “exploring ways to build community- wide social practices and support systems that foster active participation of marginalized groups in creating digital library collections and services” (Bishop et al., 2000), has attempted to embody a participatory method to recruit and actively involve community members in assessing outcomes and simulating scenarios (Hill et al., 2000) for a system designed to provide information services to a marginalized community of African American women. This article supports such a “community informatics” perspective (Gurstein, 2000) by identifying “effective uses” of technology within the social domain.The research described in this article is engaged in ex- tending the approaches of such projects to probe into the possibilities for communities to serve as the content cre- ators, interface designers, and, most importantly, informa- tion architects and ontology creators of their own systems. However, the focus of this participatory design process is on engaging communities to elicit their everyday real world priorities and activities. In this regard, it is associated with historical studies in ethnomethodology (Garﬁnkel, 1967).Ethnomethodology—Engaging a Community to Reﬂect on Its Practices Garﬁnkel developed the concept of ethnomethodology by emphasizing the authenticity of social and situated practices as fundamental to the creation and circulation of information. Decontextualized patterns and standards, described as “coding” by Garﬁnkel, generate interpreta- tions that are constructed, based on false objectives that belie the ethnographic context of the activity and practice. These codes “furnish a social science” that is removed from the “real world” it aims to study:Ethnomethodology is a determinedly “unconstructive” enterprise—it rejects the practices of coding and classifying the ethnographic record through the instructed application of predeﬁned taxonomies and analytic frameworks, and rejects any attempt to achieve a rigorous understanding of social organization through the construction of master narratives or models explaining the real world. (Crabtree et al., 2000, p. 6) Ethnomethodology argues that knowledge is formed and constructed through interactions and embedded within the context of the everyday. It is these interactions that can gen- erate the real-world character of activities in context and provide an approach to coding and representation of the “ﬂuid ontologies” that serve as the information architecture of a community system.Classiﬁcation, Standards, and the Participatory Creation of Community Ontologies Elsewhere I have argued for the importance of “ﬂuid on- tologies” (Srinivasan & Huang, 2005), or the representation of information system content according to ﬂuid, elicited descriptions articulated by community/ies. This approach al- lows the community to build its own standards structure for its information system, a representation of the information it authors that emerges from the participatory process. I have described the importance of engaging a community by using ethnographic practices (Srinivasan, 2004) to identify differ- ent individuals who can lead and sustain projects. Via a par- ticipatory process, community members can create their own ethnomethodological representations of real-world activ- ities and priorities, thereby generating information systems that hold cultural relevance. Without this approach, systems lack an organizational scheme that is reﬂective of the speciﬁc community. Systems that have categorized community knowledge around key- words, for example, have been found to be less engaging to their community of users (Srinivasan, 2004). The ﬂuid onto- logical approach creates a dynamic evolving representa- tional structure that allows information to be navigated and accessed on the basis of a community’s own acknowledg- ment of its own activities and discourse. It is a structure that is shaped in discrete intervals as community members meet, reﬂect on the system and its content, and redesign the struc- ture. It is not a type of ﬂuidity that is directly and continu- ously responsive to browsing patterns, but instead privileges the community’s communication and reﬂections that emerge from in-person meetings (conducted within the reservations at different locations monthly). The ethnomethodological approach to information system design directly complements the work of Crabtree and col- leagues, who argue for exposing the “reﬂexive social prac- tices of making sense and producing information . . . (social practices) that are embodied” (Crabtree et al., 2000). The focus of this article extends this work by engaging commu- nities to follow the principles of participatory design to cre- ate ethnomethodological information architectures. This method also resonates well with the work of Jacob and Albrechtsen (1997), who advocate a broader view of classiﬁcation structures that are driven by a mediated dialogue of actors and the reﬂectivity inspired by this process.We argue that both the design and subsequent maintenance of classiﬁcation systems . . . addresses the inherent social role of the classiﬁcation system and its situatedness within aparticular social environment. . . . This argument entails a new understanding of a professional role for the creators of classiﬁcation schemes and an enhanced understanding of their contribution as process-oriented facilitators of knowl- edge, rather than product-oriented information engineers. (Albrechtsen & Jacob, 1995, p. 30) Indeed, classiﬁcations express value, by articulating “boundary objects,” or reference points of inclusion and exclusion (Star, 1989). Scholars have decried the universal- ized and standardized classiﬁcation systems, arguing that they have effectively marginalized important domain cate- gories (Olson, 1998) and have become obsolete in describ- ing multidisciplinary knowledge production, at least in the academic domain (Beghtol, Howarth, & Williamson, 2000). The importance of classiﬁcation has driven global standards research projects such as Dublin Core and the International Committee for Documentation of the International Council of Museums Concept Reference Model (CIDOC CRM). CIDOC states its mission as follows:The primary role of the CRM is to enable information ex- change and integration between heterogeneous sources of cultural heritage information. It aims at providing the seman- tic deﬁnitions and clariﬁcations needed to transform dis- parate, localized information sources into a coherent global resource, be it within a larger institution, in intranets or on the Internet. (Crofts, Martin, Tony, Stephen, & Matthew, 2003) By privileging information interoperability, standards research encounters the danger of neglecting cultural and community context (Boast, Bravo, & Srinivasan, in press). Bowker and Star characterize the process of standardization as maintaining four major characteristics (Bowker & Star, 1999):1. Ubiquity: Classiﬁcation Schemes saturating the worlds in which we live2. Materially textured: Standards are not just numerical but have a material force in the world, and their ubiquity en- sures their power3. Past as indeterminate: The creation of standards is often arbitraryPolitics of classifying and standardizingAn approach to information system design that is grounded within the ethnographic process does not negate the powerful achievements in global standards, information retrievals, and top-level ontologies, but it also asks the information scientist to consider community-articulated metadata. Indeed, I believe that a powerful direction for future information systems would follow a hybrid model wherein communities articulate their own information systems yet on a metalevel multiple systems are integrated through global standards.1Given this argument, what is a model by which such systems can be created? And do these systems truly integrate community needs and visions?Publications in this regard are Srinivasan (2006a, 2006b).Unpacking an Ethnographic Information Studies Model How can the researcher engage the community in the development of the information system? I have argued that when the researcher can also serve as a community ethnog- rapher, he or she can begin to identify community-speciﬁc behaviors and realities (Srinivasan, 2005, 2006a, 2006b; Srinivasan & Huang, 2005). Part of this process has involved identifying leaders of different subcommunities and persuad- ing them to join to lead the project. Ethnographic processes allow knowledge to be described from the perspective of its own actors and is the basis of my strategy in identifying community members to serve as participatory designers of a system’s information architecture. To demonstrate these ideas, I introduce the Tribal Peace research project, focused on the creation of an information system to serve the needs of 19 Native American reservations located in San Diego County, California (United States).Research Case—Introducing Tribal Peace The tribal communities of San Diego County, derived from the Kumeyaay, Luiseno, Cupeno, and Cahuilla Nations, face issues of historical and spatial disconnection. The creation of the reservation system has fragmented and disconnected these peoples from one another in a physical sense while also effectively purging “collective memory.” Knowledge of native languages, songs, and rituals is largely lost across the reservations. Figure 1 reveals a signiﬁcant physical dispersion that can be understood in terms of physical distance and infrastruc- tural disconnection. Not only are the roads and highways disadvantageous for collective meetings across the reserva- tions, but other critical types of collective infrastructure are lacking, including access to water resources, hospitals, schools, and fertile land (Srinivasan, 2005). Locations on different sides of a mountain range with no direct highway connection make the journey between the reservations of Campo and San Pasqual, for example, discon- nected and difﬁcult. Even on the individual reservations, land title is not contiguous. The so-called checkerboard pattern ex- ists on the scale of a single reservation: In order to go from one point of the reservation to another, one must pass through nonreservation land. This lack of contiguity and boundedness generates the fragmentation on the microscale. I was invited to work and supported in this research by the leaders of these 19 reservations who wished to build on a signiﬁcant technology grant received by the Southern California Tribal Chairmen’s Association (SCTCA) from the Hewlett-Packard Corporation. The grant entailed the This section is taken directly from Srinivasan (2005), an unpublished doctoral dissertation. Journal articles in The Information Society (Srinivasan, 2006b) and International Journal of Cultural Studies (Srinivasan, 2006a) complement this research by focusing on the developmental, educational, and cultural impacts, respectively, of the study and methodology described in this article.The 19 native reservations of San Diego County and interconnecting highways.provision of a digital network infrastructure, wireless Inter- net towers, computers, projectors, video cameras, and so on. This infrastructure would be based on the goals of recon- necting the links between the reservations that had been destroyed over time. The grant was described as providing a “Tribal Digital Village” (www.sctdv.net). Of course the pro- vision of this Internet access and technology would not create a “village,” but instead introduce the opportunities for connectivity that all communication infrastructures offer. Therefore, I was invited to develop an information system that could serve as a space of exchange and preservation across the 19 reservations. This information system, it was decided, would be called Tribal Peace.Ethnography and Information System Design The ethnographic process of engaging the community, pre- senting my research and personae, and ultimately receiving the embrace that was manifested in an information system is a key element of this research (Srinivasan, 2005, 2006a). This has involved the understanding that the development of the research accompanies and progresses proportionally with the ethnographer’s inclusion in or exclusion from the commu- nity and, more importantly, the ability to inspire endogenousleadership and adaptation over the information system from “within” the community. The time spent with medicine peo- ple, political leaders (chairmen), educational representatives, and business owners culminated in the development of Tribal Peace. I describe these interactions with different community members in great detail elsewhere (Srinivasan, 2005, 2006a). It is worth noting that for the initial 6 months, the majority of time was spent observing different community activities (schools, meetings, etc.), meeting leaders and elders from the different reservations, building up networks of connection with community members not currently in leadership posi- tions, to involve participation by a variety of different commu- nity members, and developing bonds of connection and trust with community members. These steps helped reach an accep- tance level wherein I was seen as not simply there to study the reservations but also to work to create a system to be authored, designed, and operated by them. Therefore, the main goal of the ethnography was to develop an understanding of the struc- tures, networks, actors, and attitudes across the reservations. By building of connections with different reservation mem- bers over the ﬁrst 8 months of ﬁeldwork, a diverse group of community members from across the reservations was formed to serve as an initial project committee responsible for reﬂect- ing on the real-world activities of their reservations in contextand correspondingly designing an information system from these insights. With technology provided by the infrastructure grant, community members had already begun utilizing technolo- gies borrowed from the resource centers to digitize and document traditions, language, and songs, before the system was designed. Reﬂective stories had been created around participatory video principles (Kindon, 2000) and presented at the different reservation “resource centers.” A leadership committee emerged to dictate and design the project—its design and expansion. With my assistance, tribal members began to create video and photo-based pieces around differ- ent tribal realities on the reservations. There was little overt instruction in this process, other than teaching tribal mem- bers the basics of storyboarding and editing. A number of pieces were therefore created in addition to those already waiting to be shared. These pieces spanned a number of top- ics including traditional health practices, politics and sover- eignty, language training, youth education, and history. As the information system was to be a Web-based project accessible across the reservations, engaging the project committee in the process of visually designing and leading the outreach process was important. With that in mind dif- ferent concepts were discussed, drawn out, and described by the project committee. It was decided that a symbol of re- birth should be selected, and consensus was reached on the manzanita tree (Figure 2). As described, video and audio content had begun to be created and resource center leaders had begun to take charge of the system on an administrative and infrastructural level. However, engaging the community to serve as the designer of the system’s classiﬁcations and categorizations was an important step remaining. In essence, creating a mapping be- tween the cultural priorities and the database representations of content is the system unlocks the question of ontology and of whose ontology drives the system. In keeping with the lessons of ethnomethodology and ﬂuid ontologies that drive this article, working with the com- munity to generate an initial ontology necessitated my moving to the periphery as much as possible. Over the ﬁrst 6 months of my work with these communities, I had made contact with close to 100 individuals across the 19 reservations who expressed interest in and excitement about the project. Some were already established in public leadership roles. These included educators, political leaders, business- and casino-related individuals, parents, teenage and high school youth, medicine and health people, and cultural leaders. I had worked closely with one individual in particular, Shonta Chaloux from San Pasqual, who was seen and publicized as the project leader from within the communities. This leader and the committee invited those whom I had met as well as contacts of their own to attend the ﬁrst ontology design meet- ing, held on April 2004 at the San Pasqual Reservation re- source center. Those who attended this ﬁrst meeting repre- sented 14 of the 19 reservations and totaled 45. As a shared collaborative activity, the project leadership committee ex- pressed the goals of the session of articulating and describing the elements of collective importance that occurred across the media pieces. Each piece of content was up to 10 minutes in length, and the attendees randomly screened and discussed emergent topics, temporalities, themes, and their interrela- tionships. During this process, I was only present at these times as an observer. The decision was that the elicited structure and the elements it contained must be determined through attendee consensus, which was easier to obtain because all were assured that the committee would meet every few months to redesign the ontology on the basis of new system content or reﬂections of how the structure may more appropriately be adjusted. The process was open-ended and nonregulated by any leader or hierarchy. Any committee member could express his or her opinion and a moderator was present only to keep track of time. During this meeting, topics would be identiﬁed and discussed by the committee. They were listed without any judgment of their relevance on a whiteboard after the committee reached consensus about their relevance. The committee then derived relationships of these different topics, grouping them in clusters of conceptual relevance and identifying labels that described the group of topics. As Figure 3 demonstrates, clusters around topics such as Image Themes have been identiﬁed by the committee. Such a label may not have relevance to other communities yet with the community in question was considered rele- vant in terms of the way history and cosmology are con- ceptualized. Therefore, as topics such as Ocean, Desert, or Darkness and Light were identiﬁed in the free listing process, the committee was able to group them under the topic of imagery, a category of signiﬁcant cultural rele- vance for the 19 reservations. It therefore indicates how knowledge and classiﬁcation practices of these communi- ties follow categories that are culturally speciﬁc, locating knowledge in the natural landscape (ocean, desert cate- gories), new technologies (distance learning category), political practices (sovereignty category), and others. The process was therefore ethnomethodologically oriented, in its focus around the viewing of different video/audio pieces to aid a discussion of the everyday, real-world activities.The identiﬁcation of topics from this discussion therefore generates the “ethnomethodological architecture” (Fig- ure 3) to anchor the community information system. The information architecture of Figure 3 was decided upon across a series of project committee meetings. As further content is added to the system and issues change, the committee meets periodically to change the nature of this ontology. What is important is that this ontology has provided a mechanism for community members to associ- ate (and annotate) their submissions with a set of collec- tive topics. It creates a representation that allows informa- tion to be navigable and referenceable, yet situated within the practices and discourses of the community. System visitors can browse through content based on different on- tology topics. Also notable are the elements that populate this ontology. In that regard, it offers an approach that can potentially collaborate with the top-down ontology stan- dards and interoperability efforts in information science research.System Evaluations At the time of this publication, Tribal Peace maintains approximately 400 users and 250 pieces of content to be shared across the 19 Native American reservations. At thetime the evaluation study was made of user logs, 310 users, approximately 6% of the entire reservation population, had created accounts with the system. The following list shows their distribution by reservation:Los Coyotes: 9Pala: 32Barona: 17Campo: 15Cuyapaipe: 1Jamul: 10La Jolla: 17Manzanita: 5Mesa Grande: 8Pauma: 19Rincon: 44San Pasqual: 60Santa Ynez: 1Santa Ysabel: 15Sycuan: 12Viejas: 15Nonreservation members: 35 All of the nonreservation members have taken an interest in the system and have signed the nondisclosure agreement present on the site and required for creation of an account. The growth of usage increased signiﬁcantly over the 18monthsthatthesystemwasliveonthereservations.Ipresent a few notable results taken from the evaluation period or the ﬁrst 9 months of system usage. Table 1 presents usage data in terms of time online. Similarly, data related to the number of user sessions, ontology, and story hits, and so on, for the month sampled have been collected. When the data are compared to a plot of the time I spent on the reservations, a 100% analy- sis of variance (ANOVA) conﬁdence level that establishes a linkage of correlation is revealed. Therefore, usage is tied to the presence of the ethnographer, at least in an initial period in which the information system has been incubated Table 2 presents relevant data focused on the engagement with the different nodes of ontology over the different months. This ontology did not adapt dynamically to particular usagepatterns, but instead would be modiﬁed during the project committee meetings. The development of dynamic ontolo- gies that are community-based and weighted is an important task for future research. Table 2 therefore indicates the percentages of the 83 total ontology nodes available that were accessed by users each month the data were sampled. These data show relatively comprehensive engagement with the full range of ontology topics, particularly over time. They indicate that the ontology is fully utilized and represents at least a full subset of community topics and interests. In that regard, it seems to be an effective architec- ture of information for future usage. A third interesting finding, described in Table 3, is that reservation members seek information within this system without a bias toward content created on their own reser- vations. Indeed, the percentage of in-reservation informa- tion accessed fluctuates wildly and reveals no significant ANOVA correlation over the 9 sampled months when compared for each reservation of the 19. As an example, Table 3 presents the data from Pauma, a reservation with an approximately average number of users among the 19. Pauma, as does every other reservation, has ﬂuctuating values that do not directly correlate with month. These data are conﬁrmed in the case of every reservation sampled and tested with ANOVA. There is no signiﬁcant temporal skew toward seeking information that is “in-reservation.” This ﬁnding may be caused by the fact that the Tribal Peace system does not emphasize these elements within its interface design and instead connects information visibly through its collective ontology-focused interface. Stories can be also be accessed by speciﬁc reservation but only through a secondary feature that ﬁlters results from an initial query. Finally, Table 4 presents diversity data, which attempts to map the number of distinct stories accessed, per month and per reservation. These data reveal a diversity of usage that is independent of the months in which more time was spent by the researcher. It reveals moderately high values for May and June, yet usage skewed toward August (as with the data in Table 1), September, and November. It appears that during these visits, when Tribal Peace had been most integrated within the schools as a tool of learning, greater diversity of usage had resulted. Therefore, while total amount of system usage ties to the researcher’s presence in the early stages of this project, diversity of usage relates to activities within the reservations that were independent of the researcher’s visits and timetable.The study did not involve a formal collection of interview data but included ethnographic observations based on peri- odic visits to the ﬁeld site over the period of the study. These observations have revealed that the impact of the system cannot be considered solely in terms of quantitative data. Given that data were collected within an incubatory period, many of Tribal Peace’s beneﬁts lie in its potential to engage community infrastructures (such as schools and political and cultural institutions) in the long term. I have observed peri- odic use of the system in the on-reservation secondary schools, particularly during Native Culture, History, and Politics sections. Additionally, the system has been used in occasional meetings to allow political leaders to access the variety of voices of their peoples. Finally, the system has been advocated by other outside institutions and individuals who maintain strong relationships with the tribes. They in- clude faculty from University of California at San Diego’s Department of Ethnic Studies and directors of San Diego’s Museum of Man and the Smithsonian’s National Museum of the American Indian.3Concluding Thoughts and ReﬂectionsThe data presented beg the important question of self- sustainability, on which note I shall close this article. Can such systems exist and persist independently of the Please note that the observations in this paragraph are expounded on further in Srinivasan (2006a).presence of the ethnographer? On this topic, I have several reﬂections:1. An information system exists within a social and cultural context, and the connections between the social, cultural,and political geography and quantitative system usageare indisputable. The data reveal that diversity of usage isindependent of this factor. One cannot analyze or evalu-ate such systems in a quantitative vacuum but must care-fully integrate a social and cultural context to interpretthe trends in the data. The time and effort spent by theresearcher are manifested in the level of system usage.2. The 8 months of sampled data show a tight coupling between the time spent in the field, reservations vis-ited, and so on. This finding implies two possibilities:(1) that the 8 months is but a period of incubation, and in- formation seeking behavior may be manifested more inde- pendently over time, warranting a longitudinal study with greater time range,4 and (2) such projects will sustain as social and cultural leaders from within the community continue to steer the project, publicize it, and allow the community’s voice and practices to inform the system.3. Relatedly, institutionalization of the information system within community practices is critical. I have observed long-term sustainability potential in connecting the information system to educational, political, and cultural institutions and events (Srinivasan, 2006a).Therefore, the jury remains out regarding the sustainability of such initiatives. The clear engagement that is tied to active community outreach work reveals positive potential for the information system to engage, shape, and serve important roles within the community. It raises the possibility that tech- nologies may not thrive within marginalized communities independently of the needed social leadership from within the community. This hypothesis is consistent with the ﬁndings of notable digital divide studies that argue that the divide is more effectively resolved when a social and human connection is established to lead the technology initiative within the com- munity continuously (Warschauer, 2003). Further research can begin to uncover the “incubation period” issues and suggest strategies toward community infrastructural adoption. This article has attempted to present an approach to cre- ating information systems that are created, designed, and integrated within the ethnomethodological framework of recognizing embodied social practices. Enabling communi- ties to serve as the content creators and ontology designers appears to hold sustainable resonance. This research points to the need for further exploration and inquiry into such important questions as the following:How can communities continue to explore their goals of memory and preservation and create information systems that represent endogenous priorities? At the time of publication (April 2006) the Tribal Peace system is still being utilized relatively consistently at a level at least equal to the mean value from Table 1 during the study period. More reﬂections on this ﬁnding warrant presentation in a future publication.How can information systems allow the emergence of larger developmental processes? Answering this question may include the study of how the information system engages economic, political, and social visions and allows them to be realized. As international standards continue to emerge and accompany global technology transfers, the pertinence of these questions is magniﬁed. I believe they represent an important research trajectory, one that extends important on- going research exploring the connections between cultural groups and information systems.Acknowledgments This research was funded by the Southern California Tribal Chairmen’s Association (SCTCA) and in collaboration with Hewlett-Packard. The author would like to thank Alexander Allain and Arthur Bradford Ellis, both of Harvard University, for their assistance as researchers and developers on the described project.ReferencesAlbrechtsen, H., & Jacob, E. (1998, August). The role of classiﬁcatory structures as boundary objects in information ecologies. In W. Mustafa- Elhadi & S. Pollitt (Eds.), Proceedings of the Fifth International ISKO Conference (pp. 30–36). Frankfurt, Germany: Ergon Verlag.Appadurai, A. (1998a). Disjuncture and difference in the global cultural economy. In Modernity at large cultural dimensions of globalization (pp. 27–47). Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.Appadurai, A. (1998b). The production of locality. In Modernity at large cultural dimensions of globalization (pp. 178–200). Minneapolis: Uni- versity of Minnesota Press.Ausubel, J.H., & Herman, R. (Eds.). (1998). Cities and their vital systems: In- frastructure, past, present, and future. Washington, DC: National Academy. Beghtol, C., Howarth, L., & Williamson, N.J. (Eds.). (2000). Dynamism and stability in knowledge organization. In Proceedings of the Sixth International ISKO Conference: Advances in Knowledge Organization, no. 7 (pp. 268–274). Würzburg, Germany: Ergon.Bishop, A., Mehra, B., Bazzell, I., & Smith, C. (2000). Socially grounded user studies in digital library development. First Monday 5(6).Boast, R., Bravo, M., & Srinivasan, R. (in press). Return to Babel; Emergent diversity, digital resources, and local knowledge. The Information Society. Bodker, S. (1996). Creating conditions for participation: Conﬂicts and re- sources in systems development. Human Computer Interaction, 11, 215–236.Bodker, S., & Gronbaek, K. (1996). Users and designers in mutual activity: An analysis of cooperative activities in systems design. In Y. Engestrom & D. Middleton (Eds.), Cognition and communication at work (pp. 130–158). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Borgman, C. (2000). From Gutenberg to global information infrastructure: Access to information in the networked world. Cambridge, MA: MITPress. Bowker, G.C., & Star, S.L. (1999). Sorting things out: Classiﬁcation and its consequences. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Carroll, J.M., & Rosson, M.B. (2001). Better home shopping or new democracy? Evaluating community network outcomes. Paper presented at CHI 2001, Seattle.Crabtree, A. (1998). Ethnography in participatory design. In Proceedings of the 1998 Participatory Design Conference (pp. 93–105). Seattle: Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility.Crabtree, A., Nichols, D.M., O’Brien, J., Rounceﬁeld, M., & Twidale, M.B.(2000). Ethnomethodologically informed ethnography and IS design.(2000). Ethnomethodologically informed ethnography and IS design.Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 51(7), 666–682.Garﬁnkel, H. (1967). Studies in ethnomethodology, Englewood Cliffs, NJ:Prentice Hall.Ginsburg, F., Abu-Lughod, L., & Larkin, B. (2002). Media worlds: Anthro- pology on new terrain. Berkeley: University of California Press.Granovetter, M. (1973). The strength of weak ties. American Journal of Sociology, 78, 1360–1380.Gurstein, M. (Ed.). (2000). Community informatics: Enabling communities with information and communications technologies. Hershey, PA: Idea Group.Hammersley, M., & P. Atkinson (1983). Ethnography: Principles and prac- tice. London: Tavistock.Harris, T.M., Weiner, D., Warner, T., & Levin, R. (1995). Pursuing social goals through participatory GIS: Redressing South Africa’s historical polit-ical ecology. In J. Pickles (Ed.), Ground truth: The social implications ofgeographic information systems (pp. 196–222). New York: Guilford Press.Hill, L.L., Carver, L., Larsgaard, M., Dolin, R., Smith, T.R., Frew, J., et al.(2000). Alexandria Digital Library: User evaluation studies and system design. Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 51(3), 246–259.Jacob, E. (1999). The everyday world of work: Two approaches to the clas- siﬁcation in context. Journal of Documentation, 57(1), 76–99.Jacob, E.K., & Albrechtsen, H. (1997, June). Constructing reality: The role of dialogue in the development of classiﬁcatory structures. In I.C. McIlwaine (Ed.), Knowledge organization for information retrieval: Proceedings of the Sixth International Study Conference on Classiﬁcation Research (pp. 42–50). The Hague: International Federation for Documentation.Kim, A.J. (2000). Community building on the Web: Secret strategies for successful online communities. Berkeley, CA: Peachpit Press.Kindon, S. (2000). (Re)framing and (re)presenting: Participatory commu- nity video in geographic research. In M. Roche, M. McKenna, & P. Hesp (Eds.), Proceedings of 20th New Zealand Geography Conference (pp. 175–178). Palmerston: Massey UniversityKyng, M. (1995). Creating contexts for design. In Carroll, J.M. (Ed.), Scenario-based design: Envisioning work and technology in system development (pp. 85–108). New York: Wiley.Olson, H.A. (1998). Mapping beyond Dewey’s boundaries: Constructing classiﬁcatory space for marginalized knowledge domains. In G.C. Bowker & S.L. Star (Eds.), How classiﬁcations work: Problems and chal- lenges in an electronic age. Library Trends, 47(2), 233–254.Preece, J. (2000). Online communities: Designing usability and supporting sociability. Chichester, United Kingdom: Wiley.Preece, J. (1999). Empathy online. Virtual Reality, 4, 1–11Preece, J. (2000). Online communities: Designing usability and supporting sociability. Chichester, United Kingdom: Wiley.Putnam, R. (2000). Bowling alone. New York: Simon & Schuster.Reardon, K.M. (1998). Participatory action research as service learning. In R.A. Rhoads & J.P.F Howard (Eds.), Academic service learning: A peda- gogy of action and reﬂection (pp. 57–64). San Francisco. Jossey-Bass.Rheingold, H. (1993). The virtual community: Homesteading on the elec- tronic frontier. Reading, MA: Addison Wesley.Sassen, S. (1997). Electronic space and power. Journal of Urban Technology, 4(1), 1–17.Srinivasan, R. (2000). Village voice: Expressing narrative through commu- nity designed ontologies. Cambridge: Massachusetts Institute of Technol- ogy, Department of Architecture, Program in Media Arts and Sciences. Srinivasan, R. (2004). Reconstituting the urban through community- articulated digital environments. In Journal of Urban Technology. New York: Taylor & Francis.Srinivasan, R. (2005). Weaving spatial, digital and ethnographic processes in community-driven media design. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Graduate School of Design, Harvard University.Srinivasan, R. (2006a). Indigenous, ethnic, and cultural articulations of new media, International Journal of Cultural Studies, 9(4), 497–518.Srinivasan, R. (2006b). Where community voice and information society intersect. The Information Society, 22(5).Srinivasan, R., & Huang, J. (2005). Fluid ontologies for digital museums.Journal for Digital Libraries, 5(3), 193–204.Star, S.L. (1989). The structure of ill-structured solutions: Boundary objects and heterogeneous distributed problem solving. In L. Gasser & M.N. Huhns (Eds.), Distributed artiﬁcial intelligence. London: Pitman.Warschauer, M. (2003). Demystifying the digital divide. Scientiﬁc Ameri- can 289(2), 42–47.Wellman, B. (2001). Physical place and cyber place: The rise of personal- ized networking. International Journal of Urban and Regional Research 25(2), 227–252.Wenger, E. (1998), Communities of practice: Learning, meaning, and identity.Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Whittaker, S., Isaacs, E., & O’Day, V. (1997). Widening the Net. SIGCHI Bul- letin, 29.Woolgar, S. (2002). Virtual society? Get real! The social science of electronic technologies. Oxford: Oxford University Press.