The Presentation of Avatars in Second Life:
Self and Interaction in Social Virtual Spaces
Simon Gottschalk
University of Nevada, Las Vegas

What do interactions in virtual spaces suggest about everyday life in the
digital age? How do interactions in virtual spaces shape everyday life in
the digital age? Guided by hypermodern theory, I conduct participant
observation in the social virtual world Second Life to provide tentative answers to those questions. I suggest that Second Life is both a social psychological playground where participants enjoy individualistic
fantasies and a virtual community where they collaborate on collective
projects. When people define the virtual as real, it is real in its consequences. Accordingly, social virtual spaces such as Second Life offer sociologists unique opportunities for research, education, intervention,
and hence the development of a virtual imagination.
Keywords: virtual, symbolic interaction, Second Life, computer-mediated
communication, hypermodern self

WELCOME TO SECOND LIFE
A place to be, be different, be yourself,
Free yourself, free your mind,
Change your mind, change your look,
Be Anyone.
—Promotional messages on the Second Life Web site,
www.SecondLife.com
“I know we’re meeting as avatars, but don’t forget that there are real people with
real emotions on the other side of the screen,” writes/says Yael.1 Or rather her avatar, who goes by the name of Becky. A fiftyish Israeli woman who lives in Arizona,
Yael spends about eight hours a day in Second Life. Dahlia, one of her best friends
(both in real life and Second Life), once told me she is worried that Yael is getting
“increasingly confused” between these two lives. But then, Dahlia also told me that
Second Life has allowed her “self to soar.” Annette—the avatar of a fortyish French
sociologist—confides that about a year ago, she had to completely exile herself from
Direct all correspondence to Simon Gottschalk, Department of Sociology, University of Nevada, Las
Vegas, 4505 Maryland Parkway, Las Vegas, NV 89154-5044; e-mail: karma@unlv.nevada.edu.
Symbolic Interaction, Vol. 33, Issue 4, pp. 501–525, ISSN 0195-6086, electronic ISSN 1533-8665. © 2010
by the Society for the Study of Symbolic Interaction. All rights reserved. Please direct all requests for permission to photocopy or reproduce article content through the University of California Press’s Rights and
Permissions website, at http://www.ucpressjournals.com/reprintinfo.asp. DOI: 10.1525/si.2010.33.4.501.

SI3304_02.indd 501

10/29/10 6:22:59 PM

502

Symbolic Interaction Volume 33, Number 4, 2010

Second Life because of the real emotional pains she endured as a result of a failed
virtual romantic relationship there. As I soon discovered, this confusion is not unusual. On the other hand, the very concept of confusion is itself perhaps simplistic.
When I asked a member of the UNLV distance education staff about developing sociology courses in Second Life, she quickly answered, “Second Life? That’s
just about sex!” I thought this answer was pretty ignorant. It is like telling a friend
you are going to visit Amsterdam and being immediately suspected of wanting to
conduct morally questionable transactions in the red light district. Sure, Amsterdam
is well-known for its red-light district, but it is also world-renowned for countless
other sites and activities. Zeroing in on the red light district tells me more about that
person than about Amsterdam. Or Second Life.
Fortunately, I found a retiring professor on campus who is teaching a course in
hotel management in Second Life, to students in Hong Kong. She was very clear:
“Those professors who don’t understand the power of virtual education are dinosaurs who will soon be left behind in the dust of history.” Later that day, I met her
avatar in Second Life, where she showed me a few tricks, invited me to a virtual pas
de deux, gave me the landmarks of important educational sites, a few virtual T-shirts,
and a quick introduction to this strange yet increasingly familiar space.
What is Second Life and what am I doing here? Second Life is the internet’s most
popular and largest user-created 3-D virtual world community. Produced by UC San
Diego graduate Phillip Rosedale in San Francisco’s Linden Labs in 2003, Second Life
is the virtual home of about 15 million “residents” worldwide who appear to each
other (and themselves) as avatars in countless different sites. More than two hundred institutions of higher education have a presence in Second Life, including Yale,
Harvard, Stanford, Princeton, UCLA, USC, NYU, MIT, University of Texas, Vassar,
Cornell, Notre Dame, Penn State, University of Oregon, and the London School of
Economics, to name a few. So do the Smithsonian Institution, the Census Bureau, the
Center for Disease Control, and NASA. So do the Holocaust Museum, the Vietnam
War Memorial, Woodstock, and many other important sites of collective memory.
So do multinational corporations such as Nike, Coca-Cola, Manpower, eBay, Nokia,
L’Oréal, Microsoft, Sun Microsystems, Cisco, Dell, and a host of other Fortune 500
companies. Media outlets such as CNN, BBC, NBC, Reuters, and others have virtual
buildings in Second Life. The city of Ontario has a welcoming center here, and Sweden is the first country to have established a virtual embassy on this continent.
Second Life has classrooms and planetariums, research centers and aquariums,
libraries and auditoriums, hospitals and museums, ashrams and atriums. At the Duke
University site, nurses are trained to prepare patients for virtual surgery; at the London Imperial College Virtual Hospital, they learn to diagnose respiratory problems
in virtual patients. The Psychiatric Evaluation center at the UC Davis site provides
visitors with simulations of the schizophrenic mind; at the Ohio State University
site, one can take a virtual guided tour of various body organs. Every Wednesday at
noon (PST) the site sponsored by Cornell University’s Johnson School of Management features lectures by well-known academics, corporate executives, and journalists. The University of Derby offers virtual courses in psychology, and Harvard holds

SI3304_02.indd 502

10/29/10 6:22:59 PM

The Presentation of Avatars in Second Life

503

law classes there as well. Second Life has been used with individuals suffering from
autism, cerebral palsy, alcoholism, and (in Portugal) children victimized by abuse.
John Kerry used Second Life during the 2004 election. Sarah Palin has a site
there, as do other conservative and progressive groups. During the 2008 election,
many Second Life sites encouraged residents to vote, and on inauguration night,
many avatars celebrated the election of Barack Obama, who has recently invested
3 billion Lindens to explore green projects there.2 Dick Cheney, on the other hand,
has just canceled his recently opened account. The most discussed Second Life political site is probably Going Gitmo—a site that reproduces the experience of being
a Guantánamo Bay prisoner, from arrest to seclusion and torture.
Second Life also features countless virtual malls where one can purchase absolutely everything. The first quartile of 2009 reported $125 million transacted in Second Life—a great chunk of it in virtual real estate. And yes, there are dozens of sites
devoted to sexual encounters of every possible persuasion—from moonlit tropical
beaches inviting avatars to simulate the missionary position to dark dungeons devoted to orgies, BDSM, and bestiality.
Second Life fits Book’s (2004:2) definition of a “social virtual world.” As she explains, such worlds have six characteristics.
1. Shared Space: the world allows many users to participate at once.
2.	Graphical User Interface: the world depicts space visually, ranging in style
from 2-D “cartoon” imagery to more immersive 3-D environments.
3.	Immediacy: interaction takes place in real time.
4.	Interactivity: the world allows users to alter, develop, build, or submit customized content.
5.	Persistence: the world’s existence continues regardless of whether individual users are logged in.
7.	Socialization/Community: the world allows and encourages the formation
of in-world social groups like guilds, clubs, cliques, housemates, neighborhoods, and so forth.
The graphical user interface distinguishes social virtual worlds from text-based
ones, such as chat rooms, as it enables “residents” of this world to see it, the people
who participate in it, and themselves (or rather their avatars), in real time and from
every possible angle. They no longer have to write/read about the virtual world and
its participants or imagine them (see also Boellstorff 2008). This visual capability is
significant, as it enhances the emotional, mental, and physical experience of actually
being there. With the recent introduction of a “talk” function, Second Life residents
can now also hear and talk to each other using their own voices.3
Interactivity and community distinguish social virtual worlds from game-oriented
ones.4 Since residents can alter, develop, build, or submit customized content, the
control they have over this world is almost complete. As Book (2004:5) notes,
Although much work has been done in the fields of media studies and cultural
studies proving that media audiences are not quite as passive as one might assume, virtual worlds one-up all other forms of interactive media by allowing participants to take complete control of cultural forms of production.

SI3304_02.indd 503

10/29/10 6:22:59 PM

504

Symbolic Interaction Volume 33, Number 4, 2010

With this capability, residents become creators of this world (and themselves in it)
rather than its subjects (see also Lévy 1997:154). As a result, their investments in it
are much more significant than in virtual worlds where the landscapes, the residents’
range of possible activities, and their appearance are programmed and cannot be
significantly altered (Vicdan and Ulusoy 2008).
Since social virtual worlds encourage socializing and community building, residents come here mainly to explore this constantly growing environment and themselves in it, to educate themselves in a mind-boggling diversity of areas, to work, to
acquire and create virtual objects, to interact with others, and to build communities,
groups, and enduring associations with them. In contrast to virtual worlds designed
around games, there is no “mission” to accomplish, no tower to storm, no dragon
to slay, no enemy to kill, no winning or losing. Just creativity and interaction. Second Life is thus constantly changing as residents’ creativity, imagination, skills, relations, and projects are evolving. Every day witnesses an exponential increase in the
number of residents, sites, groups, activities, and communities—from Grateful Dead
fans to gay activists, from Palestinian supporters to Parisian artists, from teachers to
transsexuals, from philosophers to “furries.”5
As the most social of all virtual spaces and the most virtual of all social spaces, Second Life is a fascinating environment for conducting sociological research and assessing
the stability of our key concepts. And although conducting research in such spaces still
raises eyebrows among social scientists, it seems evident that developing knowledge
about these environments is essential to any understanding of the present moment
and the rapidly approaching future. In their extensive literature review of qualitative
research on the internet, Garcia et al. (2009:54) advance this point eloquently:
While some argue that the “virtual” world is a different “social space” than the
“real world” . . . we argue that there is one social world which contains both traditional and technologically advanced modes of communication and sites of social
activity. . . . To continue to effectively explore some of the main and enduring
problems of ethnographic research, ethnographers must incorporate the internet
into their research to adequately understand social life in contemporary society.

While a growing number of symbolic interactionists examine the self, interaction,
and many other interesting topics online, they typically study them in text-based
sites. Yet the unique characteristics of social virtual spaces I discussed above raise
new questions about interaction, self-presentation, and self-construction in virtual
spaces. Among those, I am chiefly interested in the following: (1) What are the unique
characteristics of interaction in social virtual spaces? (2) What do interactions in social virtual spaces suggest about the self and everyday life in the digital age? (3) How
do interactions in social virtual spaces shape the self and everyday life in the digital
age? These questions are far from trivial. It is projected that by 2011, 80 percent of
all internet users will spend time in social virtual worlds, and that by 2018, Second
Life will have 1 billion residents (Daniel 2008). As a modest attempt to answer those
questions, I have conducted participant observation and in-depth interviews in a
wide variety of Second Life sites between October 2008 and July 2009.

SI3304_02.indd 504

10/29/10 6:22:59 PM

The Presentation of Avatars in Second Life

505

THE VIRTUAL IMPULSE
Virtual worlds are simulations. Like a map, they usually start out
as reproducing actual worlds, real bodies and situations; but,
like simulations . . . they end up taking a life of their own.
—Rob Shields, The Virtual
While Second Life is new, the virtual impulse—the desire for the virtual—is quite
ancient (see Boellstorff 2008, Ikegami and Hunt 2008, and Shields 2003). From the
Lascaux cave paintings to virtual reality, it seems that humans have always sought
to articulate, (re)create, and manipulate the “real” through a variety of media. Since
culture always shapes its expressions and content, the virtual also constitutes a text
where participants express their concerns, fears, myths, hopes, and desires. In her
work on “portable communities,” Mary Chayko (2008) defines virtual worlds as
“cognitive entities” and “sociomental spaces.”6 For Book (2004), they are important
sites of cultural creativity and (re)production. As liminal spaces, they can be therapeutic and transforming, offering “the opportunity to meet neglected ego needs”
and to explore aspects of the self that we hesitate to acknowledge in real life (see
Book 2004, Boellstorff 2008, and Daniel 2008).
It is this virtual self that serves as my point of entry into Second Life. How do we
construct it, how does it affect us, and what happens to the boundary between “it” and
“us”? As contemporary research on computer-mediated communication suggests
(Fortunati 2002), it no longer makes sense to distinguish between “online” and “offline” realms. We inevitably manifest our offline self when we interact online, and our
online interactions inevitably follow and transform us when we are offline. As Cunningham (2006:16) puts it, “After virtual reality, ‘reality’ is not the same, but has been
altered by the bleeding of both ‘worlds’ into each other, by their mutual inseparability.” Since virtual worlds are always embedded in and articulate the social-historical
context in which they emerge (and vice versa), I turn to a discussion of this context.

THE HYPERMODERN MOMENT:
TURBOCONSUMPTION AND THE GRANDIOSE SELF
“Hyper” is an idiom that designates the excessive, the reaching
beyond a norm or a framework. It is located in the field of
signification of superlatives, with a connotation of constant
overreaching, of maximum, of extreme conditions.
—Jean Rheaume, “L’hyperactivité au travail:
Entre narcissisme et identité”
In the society of hyperconsumption, everybody feels
entitled to the best and the most beautiful.
—Gilles Lipovetsky, Le bonheur paradoxal: Essai sur la
société d’hyperconsommation

SI3304_02.indd 505

10/29/10 6:23:00 PM

506

Symbolic Interaction Volume 33, Number 4, 2010

Over the last decade or so, prominent French social scientists such as Gilles
Lipovetsky,7 Nicole Aubert,8 Francois Ascher,9 and others have increasingly used the
prefix hyper to describe contemporary social trends. And while these scholars use this
prefix in slightly different ways, they agree about its core aspects. Aubert, for example,
distinguishes hypermodernity from postmodernity by emphasizing the experience of
intensity, instantaneity, urgency, instant gratification, and excess. As she explains,
By replacing it [postmodernity] by the term hypermodernity, we emphasize the
fact that contemporary society has changed. . . . The essential mode of hypermodernity is excess, the overabundance of the event in the contemporary world. It is
this overabundance, rather than the collapse of the idea of progress, that is . . . at
the origin of the difficulty to think the present. (Aubert 2005a:14–15)10

The macro-sociological forces that produce and shape the hypermodern moment are
numerous and dynamic, and interact in complex, accelerating, and unpredictable ways.
Unraveling them is well beyond the scope of this article, which is more interested in
understanding the articulations of this moment at the micro level. In Le bonheur
paradoxal: Essai sur la société d’hyperconsommation (2006), Lipovetsky explains the
hypermodern self in terms of the new consumption patterns that characterize the
present moment. Dividing the history of modern consumption in three interrelated
phases, he suggests that in the third and contemporary one, the logic of consumption
(“hyperconsumption”) has completely colonized every other social sphere:
Little by little, the consumerist spirit has managed to infiltrate even family relations and religion, politics and unions, culture and leisure time. Everything unfolds as if, from now on, consumption operates as an empire that never sleeps and
whose boundaries are limitless. (Lipovetsky 2006:12)

In addition, the very motivations fanning hyperconsumption are different from
earlier periods. As he suggests (p. 36), hyperconsumption has become experiential
and emotional, and individuals do not purchase commodities to distinguish themselves from others but to live better, to enjoy fully life’s pleasures, and to feel good
about themselves:
We do not buy commodities because they enable us to show off and establish our
social status, but because they gratify us emotionally, physically, sensually, and
because they entertain us. We expect the commodities we buy to enable us to be
more independent, more mobile, to have new sensuous experiences, to improve
our quality of life, to keep us young and healthy. . . . Consumption for oneself has
replaced consumption for the other. (Pp. 38–39)

In Lipovetsky’s model, hyperconsumption has become “hyperindividualistic” (p.
95), and many of the very commodities produced during this phase (iPods, personal
computers, cell phones, PDAs, etc.) reinforce the sovereignty of self-absorbed consumers, enabling them to gratify instantly their desires and to structure their own
individualized time, space, and favorite leisure activities. Moreover, as television,
radio, the internet, and other enterprises increasingly operate on a 24/7/365 schedule, consumption also becomes “turboconsumption,” and the pampered, impatient
turboconsumer expects to have “what I want, when I want it, and where I want it”

SI3304_02.indd 506

10/29/10 6:23:00 PM

The Presentation of Avatars in Second Life

507

(p. 102; see also Gottschalk 2009). In the hypermodern moment, therefore, the expectation of instant gratification is fueled by the impulse of a bulimic constant gratification as well.
As the consumerist logic is rapidly eliminating all alternatives and is increasingly
colonizing every life sphere, as the modes of production and consumption are being constantly revolutionized and globalized in a collapsing natural environment,
hypermodern individuals’ general orientations are themselves being transformed in
profound if still unclear ways. Aubert (2005:14–16), for example, remarks that
this fundamentally individualistic personality develops in a society characterized
by instant gratification and the explosion of all limits. It is a society where the notion of sense is often reduced to the instant and present moment, a society which
seems unable to provide its members any other common referent than shared
risk. . . . In this context, where one’s allegiance is only to oneself rather than to
a cause, individuals—who self-identify first and foremost as consumers—must
struggle to maintain their social existence. We are witnessing the emergence of
new types of pathologies, a permanent hyper-competitiveness, and a completely
new relation to time.

There are other problems as well. While modernity enforced the self as an individual project, and while the postmodern turn denounced the ideological underpinnings of the very notion of a self, the hypermodern condition intensifies paradoxical
requirements. As De Gaulejac (2005:132) suggests:
Individuals are not only expected to be free, responsible, and creative, they must
simultaneously affirm an irreducible singularity. . . . They must be similar yet different, affiliated yet unaffiliated, common and uncommon, ordinary and extraordinary. . . . We define ourselves less by our similarities to others than through
exception, as if to be like everybody else was to be hopelessly anybody. . . . One
must thus escape the ordinary, reach beyond oneself, escape common categories,
and project oneself in the conquest of the grandiose self.11

That such narcissistic projects unravel the fabric of society should be evident. As
Castel (2005:120) notes:
Hypermodern individuals believe they are hyper-independent to the point of
feeling free from all responsibility and free from having to account for their
choices and behaviors. . . . There is a sort of inflation of individualism and subjectivity which is difficult to reconcile with social life, and with adhering to collective
systems of regulation which are essential to life in any society.

On a first level, therefore, Second Life seems to concretize these analyses of hyperconsumption and turboconsumers. Since the number and types of virtual commodities one can create, acquire, and enjoy are infinite, Second Life is indeed the
turboconsumer’s paradise par excellence. Here one can adorn one’s avatar/self with
perfect physical features, clothes, and objects, and spend time in one’s vision of a
perfect dwelling located in a perfect landscape where one can even control the time
of day in which it appears. As there are no limits to one’s ability to concretize (if
virtually) one’s fantasies, Second Life is also a gigantic social psychological playground where young, educated, and economically comfortable residents can gratify

SI3304_02.indd 507

10/29/10 6:23:00 PM

508

Symbolic Interaction Volume 33, Number 4, 2010

their psychological and relational fantasies in a controlled and risk-free environment
that requires little commitment, sincerity, or depth. Here they can be the stars of
every encounter in which they participate and reinvent themselves every time they
log on. They can (re)present the most idealized version of the self they dare imagine and—more interestingly perhaps—explore those aspects of the self they have
always repressed.12 Deploying their technological ability to create and submit content, and exercising total control over (virtual) time and space, they can now indeed
“be” extraordinary, omnipotent, ideal, and grandiose. It is therefore a seductive and
quite realistic “sociomental space” (Chayko 2008) where residents can enjoy socially,
psychologically, and even physically pleasurable encounters and experiences—those
very narcissistic desires that characterize the turboconsumer. As Vicdan and Ulusoy
(2008:17) put it, “Through the blurring of distinctions between fantasy and the real . . .
the hyperreal consumers become experiential subjects in the network society.”
On a second level, however, and not unlike real life, the satisfaction of these narcissistic desires necessitates interactions with others, and—contrary to all expectations—research findings suggest that virtual spaces such as Second Life promote
hyperpersonal and authentic relations, commitment, loyalty, intimacy, solidarity, altruistic impulses, and a sense of community (see Boellstorff 2008, Carter 2005, and
Chayko 2008). Communities organized around a wide variety of concerns are constantly emerging; residents help each other out, collect money to support various
causes, and teach each other how to “live” in this world. For example, a few minutes
after entering Second Life for the first time, a female avatar gave me a variety of
accessories, a virtual joint, clothes, and landmarks to “freebies” malls. Soon thereafter, other complete strangers—who probably took pity on my newbie appearance
and my visible ignorance on the most basic aspects of Second Life—showered me
with clothes and gifts.13 While such generosity is routine here, it does not mean that
Second Life is a utopia. As I soon learned, avatars also get kidnapped, raped, tortured, enslaved, insulted, ridiculed, ignored, ostracized, emotionally exploited, banished from particular sites, or imprisoned in other ones whose design can be frankly
psychotic.14 Still, it opens up a “potential space” enabling new forms of interaction,
self-reflection, collective projects, and social bonds.

AVATARS R US
Avatars are thus one of the central points at which users intersect
with technological objects and embody themselves, making
the virtual environment and the variety of phenomena
it fosters real. Avatars make virtual worlds real, not actual:
they are a position from which the self encounters the virtual.
—Tom Boellstorff, Coming of Age in Second Life:
An Anthropologist Explores the Virtually Human
Interviewer: “How old are you?”
Bunny: “How old do you want me to be?”

SI3304_02.indd 508

10/29/10 6:23:00 PM

The Presentation of Avatars in Second Life

509

Avatars have a mind of their own, and they grow in unexpected
ways. . . . You are kidding yourself if you think you will be able
to control or even predict what will happen to your avatar.
—T. L. Taylor, “Life in Virtual Worlds: Multimodalities,
Plural Existence, and Other Online Research Challenges”
“Who do we think we are when we are online, and who do we want to be there?”
(Jones 1997:18). To establish our existence in Second Life, we must first create an
avatar—a graphic representation of oneself. When logging onto Second Life for the
first time, new residents must choose between twelve “default avatars” (six women
and six men). These default avatars look rather flat and two-dimensional, and are
poorly dressed by Second Life standards. Newbies are typically recognizable by
these underdeveloped features, and more veteran residents have learned that they
can buy, acquire, or build sophisticated and realistic-looking “skins,”15 hair, body
parts, body shapes, a cornucopia of body decorations, and any virtual object they can
imagine—from a ring to a private tropical island (see Figs. 1 and 2).

Figure 1: Newbie Avatar.
The clothes are usually dreary and dull, the hair looks like patches of straw pasted on the head. It has poor
graphic resolution and looks flat, and the facial features are ill-defined and unattractive in contrast with the looks
of more veteran residents (see Fig. 2). Interestingly, however, the more time one spends in Second Life, the more
the eyes and mind adjust to those cartoonish features, which can “look” realistic. Source: http://npirl.blogspot.
com/2008/10/openlifes-steve-sima-has-message-for.html

SI3304_02.indd 509

10/29/10 6:23:02 PM

510

Symbolic Interaction Volume 33, Number 4, 2010

Figure 2: The avatars voted Most Beautiful in 2009.
Most avatars who have spent some time in Second Life achieve looks similar to those. Source: http://www.
geeksugar.com/13-Most-Beautiful-Avatars-Second-Life-176164

SI3304_02.indd 510

10/29/10 6:23:03 PM

The Presentation of Avatars in Second Life

511

Since the face, body shape, body parts, decorations, and the objects residents wear
and display are all (virtual) “sign-vehicles” we use to construct our Second Life self,
residents can spend agonizing days and many Lindens sculpting an avatar/self they
are satisfied with, regardless of whether it “looks like” their actual physical self. In
Second Life, therefore, our digital-physical appearance is no longer determined by
genetic baggage or shaped by habit, age, and other natural biological processes. On
the contrary, since we can continuously customize every inch or pixel of our avatar,
we are now fully responsible for the virtual self we present others. In contrast to
Goffman’s (1959:29) observations, we no longer possess “a limited range of signequipment” and must no longer “make unhappy choices” when (re)presenting ourselves to others. Unsurprisingly, although one can represent oneself in an infinity of
ways, most avatars look like their “real” self—only more attractive, more athletic,
and typically better endowed (see Fig. 3).16

Figure 3: Self/Avatar.
With skills, residents can produce avatars who bear an uncanny resemblance to their physical selves. According to
research, most residents construct avatars who are idealized versions of themselves. This ability to craft with equal
ease an avatar who does or does not resemble the physical self has interesting but yet unexplored consequences.
Source: http://mpop99.com/mypopspace/pages/blog_images/secondlife_main_485.jpg

SI3304_02.indd 511

10/29/10 6:23:03 PM

512

Symbolic Interaction Volume 33, Number 4, 2010

Whether the avatar looks like the person who constructs it has interesting—if
unclear—implications. As Book notes (2004:8),
In social world communities there exists a general expectation that avatars
should remain at least somewhat faithful to their owners’ offline appearances because of the fact that many people are there specifically to initiate friendships or
even romantic relationships which may at some point extend to the offline world.
Because of this expectation, there is a constant tension . . . between the desire
to meet standards of attractiveness versus accuracy in portraying offline bodies.
While everyone recognizes that avatars are likely to be highly idealized, someone
who creates an avatar that is a significant variation from his or her offline body
(particularly gender) runs the risk of being perceived by others as a “fake” or
worse, as someone who is deliberately trying to deceive their friends. . . . This
does not mean that performances of radically different identities don’t happen
in social worlds. They do. The difference is that there is greater risk of confusion
and misunderstanding between those who use avatars as vehicles of role play and
those who presume the avatars are extensions of real offline selves.

On the other hand, because we can represent ourselves in any way we wish, the
factuality of those sociodemographic sign-vehicles we display becomes much less
important than the perceived consistency between the sign-vehicles we portray and
our behaviors. In other words, whether the person behind the young blonde Californian Hippie avatar is “really” young, blonde, Californian, or Hippie matters less than
how she performs the persona she claims to be (see especially Dumitrica and Gaden
2009). Paradoxically, however, avatars often change their front and quickly assemble
sign-vehicles consistent with the persona they wish to portray, the settings in which
they find themselves, and those they meet there, in full view of others. In real life,
being caught in the backstage of such transformations could lead to embarrassment;
here, however, momentary inconsistencies between setting, appearance, and manner
are expected and accepted. The potential emotions of shame, embarrassment, “humiliation and sometimes permanent loss of reputation” (Goffman 1959:59) typically
suffered in real life do not have the same inhibitory force. Hence one quickly gets
used to the fleeting presence of contradictory codes in the ever-changing fronts of
many avatars. An overly muscular and aggressive-looking male avatar turns out to
be surprisingly shy and gentle, and an oversexed female avatar dressed in a skimpy
outfit turns out to be a devoted and modest Muslim. One interesting paradox, therefore, is that while the visual aspects of avatars give them a more compelling degree
of “realness” than the typed self-descriptions of chat room participants (“seeing is
believing”), residents also share a consensus that we should not believe what we see
but pay attention to the alignment between what avatars look/act like and what/how
they write.
In this respect, residents’ willingness to reveal the “real” self behind the avatar
varies widely. While some residents share a great deal of information with me about
who they are in real life, often e-mailing photographs, giving me their e-mail addresses, and directing me to (real) Web sites where I can learn more about them,
others are quite adamant about their desire to segregate their real-life self from

SI3304_02.indd 512

10/29/10 6:23:04 PM

The Presentation of Avatars in Second Life

513

their Second Life avatar. As Lynn, a French clerk, told me, “I come here to escape
from real life, to construct something different. I do not want to discuss it.”17 Most
others, it seems, are trying to negotiate the intersections between their real self and
their avatar. Dahlia told me that she was once looking for a dress she wanted to
wear at a party when she suddenly realized that the dress in question belonged to
her avatar’s wardrobe. Marla is wondering whether she should feel guilty about the
virtual sexual relations she is enjoying in Second Life (she is married). Yael tells me
she often implements—in her real-life relations—advice from avatars she met in
Second Life, and Vivian had to postpone her plans to launch her (real-life) musician
career because her collaboration with another (“soul mate”) Second Life musician
had reached a dead end.
To elaborate on the famous Thomas theorem, when people define the virtual as
real, it becomes real in its consequences, and the reciprocal effects between the self
and the avatar extend to more central aspects of one’s life as well. As Boellstorff
(2008:148) indicates:
Even residents who were simply shy or withdrawn in the actual world often
found that the anonymity and control of a virtual world . . . allowed them to be
“more outgoing,” a trait that could then transfer back to the actual world. One
resident noted how “experimenting with appearance or behavior in Second Life
potentially opens up new ways of thinking of things in real life.”

In my research, the most interesting case of such blurring must surely be Karen,
who had been stuck in an abusive relationship for years and “felt like a prisoner.”
She went to Second Life and created an avatar (Nina) as a means of escape until one
day, as she put it, “Nina took over.” Encouraged by the validating encounters and relations Nina/Karen was experiencing in Second Life, Karen decided to model herself
after Nina, assuming she would then enjoy the same pleasurable experiences in her
real life. She left her abusive relationship and is “a million times happier now.”
As Boellstorff (2008:149) aptly remarks, avatars are “not just placeholders for
selfhood, but sites of self-making in their own right,” and as those stories suggest,
this self-making activity informs our “real life.” As Cunningham (2006:16) asks:
Can walking differently, say, as a different gender, effect the movements that my
physical body makes in real space? . . . The ability to translate norms and embodied cultural capital from “virtual reality” to “reality” may be the next measure of cultural capital itself, an underlying variable of inequality. How well one
translates, for example, is related to speed and flexibility, two important variables
for postmodern society according to Paul Virilio. The embodied affective link
between the visual and the pathic illustrates, I feel, that this is possible.

To push this logic to a mesolevel, since relations in Second Life tend to be democratic, informal, and equalitarian, could spending an increasing amount of time here
result in finding the undemocratic, formal, and hierarchical relations that characterize everyday life in most institutions increasingly intolerable? If we can import a
newly found outgoingness from Second Life into real life, can similar transitions obtain for more “serious” types of everyday relations? And with what consequences?

SI3304_02.indd 513

10/29/10 6:23:04 PM

514

Symbolic Interaction Volume 33, Number 4, 2010

THE SELF-AVATAR PARADOX
Knowing that the individual is likely to present himself in a light that
is favorable to him, the others may divide what they witness into two
parts; a part that is relatively easy for the individual to manipulate at
will, being chiefly his verbal assertions, and a part in regard to which
he seems to have little concern or control, being chiefly derived
from the expressions he gives off. The others may then use what are
considered to be the ungovernable aspects of his expressive behavior
as a check upon the validity of what is conveyed by the governable
aspects. Perhaps the focus of dramaturgical discipline is to be found
in the management of one’s face and voice.
—Erving Goffman, The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life
Interviewer: Do you find that Dahlia-the-avatar communicates pretty
much like the person behind Dahlia?
Dahlia: “Dahlia is Dahlia. There is no difference between the two.”
The second tool that residents use to construct a virtual self and (to quote De
Gaulejac) to establish “a significant distinction” is through their typed communication style. Thus, if we can modify at will those aspects of one’s appearance Goffman
identified as permanent (looks, race, gender), those which he identified as dynamic
(manner) are reduced almost solely to one’s written communication style—a style
that we cannot easily change,18 especially because the pace of Second Life conversations is typically quick.19 Interestingly, therefore, those aspects of the “front” we use
to present our self and assess the selves others present to us have a different weight
and importance than Goffman suggested in his analysis of face-to-face interaction.
While we can customize every pixel of our avatar’s appearance, we cannot invent
communication skills we do not actually possess.
The avatar paradox is that while we can create multiple avatars that look different
from each other and nothing like ourselves, they essentially always communicate in
the same way. Our way. In Second Life as in everyday life, we are what/how we communicate, but since the main medium of communication here is the written word,
participation in Second Life may very well “force the self out.” In other words, (1)
the reduction of many media of communication to just the written one, (2) the disinhibition, hyperpersonal relations, and anonymity characteristic of virtual spaces, and
(3) the dynamics of synchronous written conversations all combine to encourage the
expression of a self that might be much less rehearsed and performed than in real life.
As one of Chayko’s (2008) respondents remarked, “We may even be more ourselves
when we are not entangled in face-to-face dynamics and pressures.” Many of my
respondents echo this sentiment and believe that their self becomes paradoxically
perhaps most perceptible and “true” when they interact as Second Life avatars.

THE LOOKING-GLASS AVATAR
It is possible that interacting through an avatar might stimulate
the “observing ego”—the ability to look at oneself objectively and

SI3304_02.indd 514

10/29/10 6:23:04 PM

The Presentation of Avatars in Second Life

515

rationally. (Daniel, 2008) Second Life is a lab where we can work on
our problems, a useful learning process for the self. The point is to
try to use what we’ve learnt here and apply it in the world out there.
—Marla, interview
Cooley’s concept of the “looking-glass self” nicely synthesizes the idea that the others
we interact with reflect us. When we interact with others, we are not solely attending to
the particular topic of the interaction but are also assessing how those others respond
to us. We accomplish this by attempting to look at ourselves from their viewpoints and
using their language, paralanguage, facial gestures, kinesics, proxemics, sounds, touching, and other actions as signs. As Goffman and scholars associated with the Palo Alto
school also emphasized, we communicate and perceive such signs both consciously
and unconsciously, and we are typically more likely to believe those aspects of others’
behaviors that they do not seem to control (the impressions they give off).
On a first level, assessing how others perceive me/my avatar in Second Life is much
trickier than in real life, since avatars do not yet possess the full range of facial expressions and kinetic abilities that we take for granted in everyday life.20 Of course,
one can acquire or build “scripts” that will activate the avatar’s body and face
(and every avatar has a few of those “default” ones; see Fig. 4). Yet the activation of
those scripts requires pressing different keys, which can take time, and the creation
of new scripts takes skills, which many avatars do not possess. As a result, unless
they click on “pose balls” that activate the avatars in various and context-specific
repetitive movements,21 most avatars’ gestures remain relatively constant, except

Figure 4: Default Gestures Scripts.
Residents can build or purchase “scripts”—or gestures, some of which are arrestingly realistic, creative, and graceful.
Many Second Life sites also contain “pose balls.” Clicking on those animates the avatar in specific and repetitive
motions. Source: Simon Gottschalk’s snapshot of the Second Life “gestures” menu on his interface

SI3304_02.indd 515

10/29/10 6:23:05 PM

516

Symbolic Interaction Volume 33, Number 4, 2010

for a few repetitive facial expressions (blinking eyes) and body movements (leaning
forward, crossing one’s arms and legs, breathing, shifting body weight from one leg
to another, etc.).
While this massive reduction in the number of media through which we typically
communicate sharply diminishes our ability to self-reflect from the other’s points of
view, the visual aspect of social virtual worlds allows for more self-reflection than in
text-based sites. Here we are no longer just “a product of linguistic manipulation”
(Zhao 2005:402) but can self-reflect and represent ourselves and our actions to others visually.
In addition, since I can actually look at my avatar from the perspective of the
person I am interacting with (or any perspective, for that matter; see Fig. 5 and Fig. 6),

Figure 5: The looking-glass avatar.
Simon Gottschalk’s avatar viewed from his informant’s perspective. Thanks to the 360 degree viewing abilities of
Second Life, one can virtually observe oneself from every point of view, including the point of view of the avatar
one is interacting with. Snapshot taken by Simon Gottschalk.

SI3304_02.indd 516

10/29/10 6:23:06 PM

The Presentation of Avatars in Second Life

517

Figure 6: Defining the virtual situation.
Simon Gottschalk conducting an interview with Hannah in a public space. Unfortunately, the printed page cannot
reproduce the body and facial movements of both avatars, or the dynamic aspects (including other avatars) and
the soundtrack of the landscape in which they conduct this interview. Those are essential parts of the interview
situation in Second Life. Snapshot taken by Simon Gottschalk, with Hannah’s permission.

I can quickly adjust my appearance and proxemics to better attune to or define
the virtual “situation.” For example, to better frame an encounter as an interview,
I would invite respondents to “sit down” and would position my avatar so that we
were facing each other or looking in the same direction.
On a second level, the ability to look at and experience one’s avatar/self from an
external perspective introduces a new and subtler dimension in the experience of
self-reflection in social virtual spaces. Mead’s notion of the “I-Me” dialogue entails
the idea of “mental rehearsals” of various lines of action in response to others’ reactions or anticipated reactions to us. Second Life provides the unique opportunity to
actually enact those various lines of action and to immediately, visually, and viscerally
assess their impact. It provides the now literal (if still virtual) “third party” viewpoint
from where I can watch myself/avatar try out different lines of action and see/hear/
read how others respond to those (see Pena et al. 2009:2). By literally watching others respond to me/my avatar, I now have immediate (if still limited) feedback for
my self-presentation and communication patterns. Since those others are—just like
me— “real people,” and since the consequences for initiating the “wrong” lines of
action are minimal, it is not difficult to appreciate how this self-reflecting ability
might expand the self’s repertoire. As research reports, this expanded repertoire
does not vanish once we exit Second Life and reenter real life. It continues to inform
us offline and online in a (hopefully) self-corrective process.

SI3304_02.indd 517

10/29/10 6:23:06 PM

518

Symbolic Interaction Volume 33, Number 4, 2010

In Second Life, therefore, not only can one educate oneself about a wide variety
of topics, gain new computer skills, explore this expanding virtual continent, meet a
constantly changing population, and conduct research, one can also learn about oneself, try out different scripts, and expand one’s repertoire of interactional (and hence
self) possibilities with others. Because the rules of interaction in Second Life follow
different dynamics than in real life, individuals can also experience and explore the
self/avatar in unusual and relatively unscripted encounters. Much can be learned about
oneself in such interactional conditions.22

PEDAGOGICAL AND RESEARCH OPPORTUNITIES
In cyberspace . . . each of us is a potential transmitter and
receiver in a space that is qualitatively differentiated, nonstatic,
constructed by its participants, and explorable. Here we no
longer encounter people exclusively by their name, geographical
location, or social rank, but in the context of centers of interest,
within a shared landscape of meaning and knowledge.
—Pierre Lévy, Collective Intelligence: Mankind’s Emerging
World in Cyberspace
I went to a club, everyone was very friendly, talk was flowing, and
suddenly an avatar appeared. A female, a very very heavy avatar,
overweight. All talk stopped. We are so used to seeing varying
degrees of perfection here that anyone who doesn’t fit that mold is
immediately noticed. Another time, a girl came into a club on crutches
and one leg. Total silence. Everyone became very uncomfortable.
—Dahlia, interview
Social virtual spaces offer limitless pedagogical possibilities, many of which are currently being developed by both academic and corporate worlds. Energized by social interaction, they are strategic spaces for teaching and practicing social science.
Since people learn better by actively participating than by watching or listening, we
can design virtual situations where students will actually experience our concepts,
models, and theories. For example, we can lecture at length on racism or sexism,
but we can also invite students to create avatars who are different from themselves
in terms of gender, age, race, or any other demographic variable, and experience
everyday (virtual) interactions from these different positions. We can lecture about
the labeling process people who deviate are subjected to, but we can also invite students/avatars to participate in experiments revolving around virtual deviance and
understand the labeling process very personally and without risks. We can lecture
about the formation of social movements, but we can also encourage students to
organize those in virtual spaces. We can lecture about the processes of group formation, but we can also invite students to self-consciously generate and participate
in them.

SI3304_02.indd 518

10/29/10 6:23:07 PM

The Presentation of Avatars in Second Life

519

Social science research in Second Life is similarly promising. For example, scholars in a wide variety of disciplines have explored the construction of virtual space
(McIntosh 2008), the reproduction of heteronormativity (Brookey and Cannon
2009), civic engagement (Gordon and Koo 2008), group norms (Stromer-Galley
and Martey 2009), the public sphere (Ikegami and Hut 2008), identity (Messinger
et al. 2008), gender (Dumitrica and Gaden 2009), stigmatization (Boonstrom 2008),
the relations between online and offline behaviors (Yee, Bailenson, and Duchenaut
2009), the consumerist logic (Vicdan and Ulusoy 2008), and changing body image
(Becerra and Stutts 2008). Roush, Nie, and Wheeler (2009) have explored visual
methodologies here, and Boellstorff (2008) has created focus groups as well as conducted extensive ethnography in Second Life.
In light of its international scope, 24/7 access, the participation of millions of people speaking a wide variety of languages, its constant expansion, and the relatively
spontaneous interactions it enables, social virtual spaces such as Second Life represent the exciting new frontier of virtual qualitative research. This frontier presents us
with both opportunities and challenges. Let us start with the opportunities.
First, since Second Life is open and free to anyone who has an e-mail account,
practically everyone can access it and conduct participant observation in its countless zones, communities, and areas where people meet, interact, and negotiate the
(virtual) reality they are creating and want to inhabit. Interestingly, however, while
access to Second Life is free, entry to its various communities and subcultures poses
the same challenges as does real-life participant observation. In other words, we
must still be accepted by the members of these virtual communities, establish rapport
with them, and gain their trust. However, the social psychological dynamics characterizing this space and the kinds of interaction that unfold here might accelerate these
necessary processes. Second, the population of informants is potentially infinite, as
the number of Second Life residents is constantly growing and changing. In this
respect, we might also be better able to conduct longitudinal qualitative research in
Second Life and trace avatars’ trajectories—from virtual “birth” on. Third, because
people in so many different countries and time zones log onto Second Life, we can
conduct interviews from anywhere, with people living anywhere, and at any time.
The same obtains for conducting observation. We can teleport to the “field” effortlessly from anywhere and whenever, and can experience it at different times of the
day, the week, and the year. Fourth, while in real life, finding a setting conducive to
interviews might be difficult, the size and diversity of Second Life guarantees that
such a setting will always be available. Better yet, one can always collaborate with
informants on building virtual settings for conducting interviews, focus groups, and
other research activities. Fifth, since access to Second Life is so easy, we can perform multiple interviews with the same informants over extended periods of time.
Similarly, we can also conduct repeated interviews with groups whose members no
longer need to be physically co-present. Sixth, when conducting an interview by typing questions and answers, the entire conversation is automatically saved on our
computers, enabling us to return to these conversations, analyze them, and use our

SI3304_02.indd 519

10/29/10 6:23:07 PM

520

Symbolic Interaction Volume 33, Number 4, 2010

interpretations to guide our next interviews. When conducting a subsequent interview with the same informants, we can easily present them with a verbatim passage
that we find ambiguous or want to develop with them. Seventh, as a researcher, I can
easily represent myself as an old chubby Asian businessman as I can a young white
female CEO, an athletic middle-aged African American male professor, a tattooed
Israeli female punk rocker, or anybody I choose. In addition, not only can I choose
to modify my avatar’s physical appearance at will, but I can also easily create multiple avatars (“alts”), each with his or her own demographic and physical characteristics, each developing a different network of informants in different communities.
Hence we must both be self-reflexive about how we represent ourselves in virtual
spaces and keep in mind that we can choose to represent ourselves in ways that will
facilitate access, entrée, and rapport (see also Lyman and Wakeford 1999; Taylor
1999).23 Eighth, Second Life residents can acquire scripts that animate their avatars
(facial gestures, kinesics, touching, proxemics), thereby enhancing the realism of copresence (Antonijevic 2008). As Garcia et al. (2009:65) note in this respect, “While
previous generations of online ethnography have been biased toward textual data,
the next generation will also have to engage with sound and movement.” Ninth, relationships in cyberspace quickly become “hyperpersonal,” meaning that individuals
need little encouragement to quickly reveal sometimes exceedingly personal and
intimate information about themselves. Hence Second Life is especially conducive
to in-depth interviews. As Garcia et al. (2009:68) note:
Because of the anonymity of Computer Mediated Communication, respondents
may be less concerned about the impressions they are making (Riva 2002). Thus,
online interview responses may be more candid than those obtained from offline
interviews.

Considering the issue of power in qualitative research, it is also noteworthy that “the
anonymity factor in online interviews may balance power between interviewer and
interviewee; interviewees may feel freer to challenge researchers than they would
in a face-to-face interview” (Catterall and Maclaran 2002 in Garcia et al. 2009:68).
Tenth, since we can create and activate several avatars, we can also develop (virtual)
field experiments where we can observe how onlookers react to particular scenarios
our avatars enact.
The main challenge of Second Life research revolves around the resident’s “true”
identity. Yet, while I can never be certain that the resident I am interacting with is
really whom she or he claims to be in terms of gender, race, residence, age, and so
forth, perhaps those issues matter less in Second Life than in real life. In other words,
I am less interested in whether the individuals behind an avatar are “really” who
they claim to be than in how they enact their identity, what their motivations are for
participating in Second Life, what they typically do there, what they discover about
themselves, and how they negotiate the boundaries between real life and Second
Life. Since there seems to be a tacit agreement to suspend disbelief here, researchers
should take this fact into consideration and focus on other aspects of the “self” that
residents do find important. Like in face-to-face qualitative research, the quality of

SI3304_02.indd 520

10/29/10 6:23:07 PM

The Presentation of Avatars in Second Life

521

our ethnographic experience and findings ultimately depends on the empathic rapport we establish with our informants. Hence, if residents do not care about social
categories such as gender, age, race, and class, maybe we should not either.
There are clearly many unanswered questions and problems about conducting
qualitative research in social virtual spaces. As Green (1999:418) suggests, these
spaces pose new methodological and analytic challenges to social researchers, and
our “responses are critical not only for how we conduct research in social virtual spaces but also for how these spaces develop.” Since the offline and the online
worlds are increasingly intertwined, we should uphold the principle of “contextual
naturalness” (Kazmer and Xie 2008:259), and use those methods that are most attuned to the particular space where we meet our informants.

CONCLUSIONS: THE SOCIO-VIRTUAL IMAGINATION
The role of information technology and digital communications
is . . . to promote the construction of intelligent communities in
which our social and cognitive potential can be mutually developed
and enhanced. Based on this approach, the major architectural
project of the twenty-first century will be to imagine, build,
and enhance an interactive and ever changing cyberspace. . . .
The project for a knowledge space will lead to a re-creation
of the social bond based on reciprocal apprenticeship,
shared skills, imagination, and collective intelligence.
—Pierre Lévy, Collective Intelligence:
Mankind’s Emerging World in Cyberspace
People can feel so close to one another, so strongly bonded
in portable communities because proximity and presence
are perceived by us in ways that transcend the physical.
—Mary Chayko, Portable Communities:
The Social Dynamics of Online and Mobile Communication
Social virtual worlds are just emerging, and judging by the substantial financial investments by universities, hospitals, historical societies, research centers, multinational corporations, political parties, and media outlets, they contain the promise for
unimaginable future possibilities. In contrast to other historical and anthropological
examples of liminal space, which are/were typically separated from everyday life,
social virtual worlds such as Second Life are fully embedded in it. They emerge at a
historical moment when we are already spending an increasing amount of our time
online (e-mailing, Web surfing, blogging, twittering, etc.), interacting with disembodied others, and establishing our presence and existence electronically. Accordingly, it
is not solely the existence of social virtual worlds per se that is interesting, but also
their relation to the already virtualized “real” everyday life in the digital age.
Social virtual worlds provide a free “potential space” where real individuals—qua
avatars—can and do attempt to create an alternative reality. Here they simultane-

SI3304_02.indd 521

10/29/10 6:23:07 PM

522

Symbolic Interaction Volume 33, Number 4, 2010

ously concretize their individualistic fantasies and educate, console, and help each
other; fall in love; bare their souls; organize for political causes; share information;
develop communities; and enact aspects of their selves they did not know exist, were
too embarrassed to admit, or always wanted to master. The disembodied self of
e-mails, blogs, Web sites and chat rooms is reembodied as an avatar, who visually
interacts with others, is influenced by them, and self-reflects from their perspectives.
With their visual and acoustic capacities, promotion of creativity, and emphasis on
spontaneous interactivity, social virtual worlds such as Second Life heighten the realism of our participation and the intensity of the emotions we experience there.
As a result, the constantly evolving avatar influences the “real” self, who now also
orients toward virtual, yet all-too-real others.
By replacing the rigid cultural-structural codes of identity-construction by flexible
and recombinant digital ones, we construct and present selves in Second Life that
are free to expand, explore, and innovate, and are invited to meet others in radically
different ways. That this avatar typically looks like an idealized version of the self
should not be interpreted as proof of deception or fakery. After all, we “naturally”
present an idealized version of our self in face-to-face interactions. This tendency expresses common psychological impulses, which are—as I have shown—increasingly
stimulated by hypermodern cultural norms. Ultimately, avatars are porous graphic
shells through which curious minds interact in a boundless space where everything is
virtually possible. As this space evolves and avatars mature, these narcissistic needs
will eventually subside.
Social virtual worlds are certainly not utopian. Capitalism is still the “commonsense” principle organizing its economy, and there are residents who still reproduce
all the regressive “isms.” But if social virtual worlds are visibly colonized by
capitalist greed, violent libidinal impulses, religious intolerance, and narcissistic
pride, they are also energized by communitarian longings, altruistic élans, progressive projects, educational efforts, spiritual yearnings, and interactional desires.
Psychological playground for narcissist turboconsumers or “cradle of collective
intelligence”? Probably both. What seems crucial, however, is that social scientists
have never had this kind of access to such an important technology—a technology
that invites people to meet, interact, and create alternative forms of association.24
As sociomental spaces that an increasing number of people will regularly frequent,
social virtual worlds such as Second Life are therefore strategic sites that sociologists should not only investigate but also self-consciously shape in the very process
of researching and participating in them. They are promising new are(n)as where
we can nurture and promote a sociological imagination for the digital age.

NOTES
1. I have given all avatars and informants a pseudonym to protect their privacy and uphold confidentiality.
2. The Linden is the Second Life currency. Although its rate varies, Linden$250 = US$1.

SI3304_02.indd 522

10/29/10 6:23:08 PM

The Presentation of Avatars in Second Life

523

3. As Boellstorff (2008) explains, however, the introduction of this talk function continues to be
controversial, and many residents choose not to use it. Part of the reason is that it introduces
too much of “real” life into Second Life.
4. Note that there are sites devoted to games in Second Life.
5. Furries are avatars that are hybrids of animals, humans, and machines.
6. Social virtual worlds like Second Life require that we add the key adjective “visual” in front of
these terms.
7. Le bonheur paradoxal: Essai sur la société d’hyperconsommation (2006), Hypermodern Times
(2005), “La pub sort ses griffes” (1987), and L’ ère du vide: Essais sur l’individualisme contemporain (1983).
8. L’individu hypermoderne (2005a), “L’intensité de soi” (2005b), and “Un individu paradoxal”
(2005c).
9. La société hypermoderne (2005b), and Le mangeur hypermoderne (2005a).
10. There is an interesting parallel between (at the individual level) the social psychological imperative to establish a significant distinction and (at the economic level) the marketing imperative of hyperdifferentiation between commodities.
11. All translations of French texts are the author’s.
12. The two are, of course, interrelated. Second Life can also be approached as a vast electronic
canvas on which residents project their unconscious. As Daniel (2008) suggests, it is attracting
the attention of a number of psychologists who recognize its therapeutic potential.
13. “Newbies” or “Noobs” is the term used to designate new Second Life residents. One can quickly
assess the length of time an avatar/person has been in Second Life by clicking on it and reading
its “profile,” which tells its “date of birth.” On the other hand, since individuals can create many
different avatars, the birthdate does not provide valid information as to how long the person
behind the avatar(s) has actually been in Second Life.
14. A sociological research project called “Normwatch” invites residents to report and document
instances of deviant behavior in Second Life.
15. “Skins” refer to facial features and skin color and quality.
16. See especially Messinger et al. 2008, “On the Relationship between My Avatar and Myself.”
17. Interestingly also, the “greater risk of confusion” Book mentions is enhanced by the ability of
one person to represent himself or herself by many avatars who may look very different from
each other and from the person creating them. To add to the confusion, different people may
decide to activate the same avatar in the same or different Second Life sessions.
18. It is interesting that the Unabomber’s identity was discovered by his brother, who noticed key
sentences and expressions in the anonymous manifesto the Unabomber sent to the New York
Times and the Washington Post.
19. One’s communication style also entails skills such as speed, ability to patiently wait and “listen”
to others when they write, to quickly and correctly interpret what they write, and to respond
quickly, efficiently, and appropriately. The “quickly” is important. Because of time lag between
a message I send and the other’s written response, exchanges with avatars who are slow to
synthesize, compose, and effectively communicate their thoughts and emotions can be quite
frustrating, especially compared to everyday face-to-face conversations.
20. Proxemics, on the other hand, can easily be activated and provide a wealth of information
about the nature of an avatar’s interactions and relationships. Interestingly also, respondents
can secretly whisper to each other.
21. Those include dancing, eating/drinking, smoking, riding various vehicles, and all the imaginable
motions associated with sex.
22. Corporations such as Future Works utilize Second Life to train employees in multicultural
communication.
23. Of course, the decision to represent oneself as a different person entails thorny ethical consideration (see Boehlefeld 1996 and Waskul and Douglass 1995).
24. Compare social scientists’ access to Second Life with their access to radio, television, movies,
and other examples of popular culture outlets.

SI3304_02.indd 523

10/29/10 6:23:08 PM

524

Symbolic Interaction Volume 33, Number 4, 2010

REFERENCES
Antonijevic, Smiljana. 2008. “From Text to Gesture Online: A Microethnographic Analysis of Nonverbal Communication in the Second Life Virtual Environment.” Information, Communication, and Society 11(2):221–38.
Ascher, Francois. 2005a. Le mangeur hypermoderne: Une figure de l’individu eclectique. Paris: OdileJacob.
———. 2005b. La société hypermoderne. Paris: Broché.
Aubert, Nicole, ed. 2005a. L’individu hypermoderne. Paris: Erès.
———. 2005b. “L’intensité de soi.” Pp. 73–87 in L’individu hypermoderne, edited by N. Aubert.
Paris: Erès.
———. 2005c. “Un individu paradoxal.” Pp. 13–24 in L’individu hypermoderne, edited by N. Aubert.
Paris: Erès.
Becerra, Enrique P. and Mary Ann Stutts. 2008. “Ugly Duckling by Day, Super Model by Night: The
Influence of Body Image on the Use of Virtual Worlds.” Journal of Virtual Worlds Research
1(2). Retrieved from jvwresearch.org.
Boehlefeld, Sharon P. 1996. “Doing the Right Thing: Ethical Cyberspace Research.” Information
Society 12(14):141–52.
Boellstorff, Tom. 2008. Coming of Age in Second Life: An Anthropologist Explores the Virtually
Human. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Book, Betsy. 2004. “Moving Beyond the Game: Social Virtual Worlds.” Cultures of Play panel, State
of Play 2 conference, October. Retrieved May 16, 2009, from http://www.virtualworldsreview.
com/info/contact.shtml.
Boonstrom, Robert. 2008. “The Social Construction of Virtual Reality and the Stigmatized Identity
of the Newbie.” Journal of Virtual Worlds Research 1(2). Retrieved from jvwresearch.org.
Brookey, Robert Allan and Kristopher L. Cannon. 2009. “Sex Lives in Second Life.”Critical Studies
in Media Communication 26(2):145–64.
Carter, Denise. 2005. “Living in Virtual Communities: An Ethnography of Human Relationships in
Cyberspace.” Information, Communication, and Society 8(2):148–67.
Castel, Robert. 2005. “La face cachée de l’individu hypermoderne: L’individu par défaut.” Pp. 119–
28 in L’individu hypermoderne, edited by N. Aubert. Paris: Erès.
Catterall, M. and Pauline Maclaran. 2002. “Researching Consumers in Virtual Worlds: A Cyberspace Odyssey.”Journal of Consumer Behavior 1(3):228–38.
Chayko, Mary. 2008. Portable Communities: The Social Dynamics of Online and Mobile Communication. New York: State University of New York Press.
Cunningham, Kim. 2006. “Virtually Transformed: Second Life’s Implications for the Status of the
Body.” Paper presented at the meetings of the American Sociological Association.
Daniel, John. 2008. “The Self Set Free.” Therapy Today 19(9). Retrieved from http://therapytoday.
net.
De Gaulejac, V. 2005. “Le sujet manqué: L’individu face aux contradictions de l’hypermodernité.”
Pp. 129–43 in L’individu hypermoderne, edited by N. Aubert. Paris: Erès.
Dumitrica, Delia and Georgia Gaden. 2009. “Knee-High Boots and Six Pack Abs: Autoethnographic
Reflections on Gender and Technology in Second Life.” Journal of Virtual Worlds Research
1(3). Retrieved from jvwresearch.org.
Fortunati, Leopoldina. 2002. “The Mobile Phone: Towards New Categories and Social Relations.”
Information, Communication, and Society 5(4):515.
Garcia, Angela Cora, Elecea I. Standlee, Jennifer Beckhoff, and Yan Cui. 2009. “Ethnographic
Approaches to the Internet and Computer-Mediated Communication.” Journal of Contemporary Ethnography 38:52–82.
Goffman, Erving. 1959. The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life. New York: Doubleday.
Gordon, Eric and Gene Koo. 2008. “Using Virtual Worlds to Foster Civic Engagement.” Space and
Culture 11(3):204–21.
Gottschalk, Simon. 2009. “Hypermodern Consumption and Megalomania: Superlatives in Commercials.” Journal of Consumer Culture 9(3):307–27.

SI3304_02.indd 524

10/29/10 6:23:08 PM

The Presentation of Avatars in Second Life

525

Ikegami, Eiko and Piet Hut. 2008. “Avatars Are for Real: Virtual Communities and Public Spheres.”
Journal of Virtual Worlds Research (1)1. Retrieved from jvwresearch.org.
Jones, Steven G., ed. 1997. Virtual Culture: Identity and Communication in Cybersociety. Beverly
Hills, CA: Sage.
Kazmer, Michelle M. and Bo Xie. 2008. “Qualitative Interviewing in Internet Studies: Playing with the
Media, Playing with the Method.” Information, Communication, and Society 11(2):257–78.
Lévy, Pierre. 1997. Collective Intelligence: Mankind’s Emerging World in Cyberspace. New York:
Plenum.
Lipovetsky, Gilles. 1983. L’ère du vide: Essais sur l’individualisme contemporain. Paris: Gallimard.
———. 1987. “La pub sort ses griffes.” Le Débat 43:126–40.
———. 2005. Hypermodern Times. Malden: Polity.
———. 2006. Le bonheur paradoxal: Essai sur la société d’hyperconsommation. Paris: Gallimard.
Lyman, Peter and Nina Wakeford. 1999. “Going into the (Virtual) Field.” American Behavioral
Scientist 43(3):359–76.
McIntosh, Keith. 2008. “The Social Construction of Virtual Space.” Michigan Sociological Review
(Fall):196–214.
Messinger, Paul R., Xin Ge, Eleni Stroulia, Kelly Lyons, and Kristen Smirnov. 2008. “On the Relationship between My Avatar and Myself.” Journal of Virtual Worlds Research (1)2. Retrieved
from jvwresearch.org.
Pena, Jorge, Jeffrey T. Hancock, and Nicholas A. Merola. 2009. “The Priming Effects of Avatars in
Virtual Settings.” Communication Research Online 20(10):1–19.
Rheaume, Jean. 2005. “L’hyperactivité au travail: Entre narcissisme et identité.” Pp. 89–102 in
L’individu hypermoderne, edited by N. Aubert. Paris: Erès.
Roush, Paula, Ming Nie, and Matthew Wheeler. 2009. “Between Snapshots and Avatars: Using Visual Methodologies for Fieldwork in Second Life.” Journal of Virtual Worlds Research 2(1).
Retrieved from jvwresearch.org.
Shields, Rob. 2003. The Virtual. London: Routledge.
Stromer-Galley, Jennifer and Rosa Martey. 2009. “Visual Spaces, Norm Governed Places: The Influence of Spatial Context Online.” New Media and Society 11(6):1041–60.
Taylor, T. L. 1999. “Life in Virtual Worlds: Multimodalities, Plural Existence, and Other Online
Research Challenges.” American Behavioral Scientist 43:436–49.
Vicdan, Handan and Ebru Ulusoy. 2008. “Symbolic and Experiential Consumption of Body in
Virtual Worlds: From (Dis)Embodiment to Symembodiment.” Journal of Virtual Worlds
Research 1(2). Retrieved from jvwresearch.org.
Wallace, Patricia. 1999. The Psychology of the Internet. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Waskul, Dennis and Mark Douglass. 1996. “Considering the Electronic Participant: Some Polemical
Observations on the Ethics of On-Line Research.” Information Society 12:129–39.
Yee, Nick, Jeremy N. Bailenson, and Nicolas Duchenaut. 2009. “The Proteus Effect: Implications of
Transformed Digital Self-Representation on Online and Offline Behavior.” Communication
Research 36(2):285–312.
Zhao, Shanyang. 2005. “The Looking-Glass Self: Through the Looking-Glass of Telecoprent
Others.” Symbolic Interaction 3:387–405.

SI3304_02.indd 525

10/29/10 6:23:08 PM

