Interactive Cinema in the Digital Age
Chris Hales

Interactive cinema was pioneered in a predigital age, and despite the inherent
linearity of projected film and the need for special equipment to allow
audiences to make choices or respond, early interactive films implemented
both story-branching and parallel narrative structures. The arrival of digital
technology to the audiovisual arena led not just to a reinterpretation of
these two structures but also to the creation of new forms of the interactive
film that were not possible before.
This chapter analyses the methods, structures and techniques for designing
and delivering interactive films and investigates how these have been
explored in various projects from the 1960s to the present day, demonstrating
how several identifiable models of interactive cinema are directly related
to the underlying technologies which have created them. The evolution
of the interactive film will be traced through three distinct technological
phases: a film-based phase centred on fictional entertainment, a period in
which Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) and nonlinear narrative were
the central issues, and an online phase founded more on participation, collaboration
and personalisation.
1. INTRODUCTION
The interactive film has a relatively recent history, dating in a functional
form back to 1967, the year in which the Oxford English Dictionary records
the first use of the term interactive in the human-to-computer sense (in an
IEEE journal). The development of interactive cinema has inevitably been
shaped by evolving technologies, since it requires a nonlinear audiovisual
delivery system as well as an interface technology to allow choices to be
made, making it a type of special format cinema. There has been a lack of
consistent terminology and few interactive films have ever achieved widespread
acclaim or public recognition. The earliest terms employed included
kinoautomat, audience participation film or decision cinema; in the mid-
1990s the term interactive movie came to mean a particular type of pixelbased
computer game interspersed with passive filmed sequences (typified
by Wing Commander III of 1994); and in the era of social media audiences
can interact by collaborating and personalising what very often remains a
linear film. Historically, it is possible to identify three phases of interactive
cinema. An early phase was centred on dramatic narrative issues and entertainment.
Then in the 1980s and 1990s the genre became dominated by HCI
considerations and flavoured by the academic discussion of game versus narrative;
and in the post Internet phase, interacting can mean participation in
the development of the narrative and/or augmentation of the story content
(often across a variety of media) by a social community rather than individual
direct manipulation of premade content locked into the product itself.
This chapter discusses systems with integrated interaction that can change
what happens next during a viewing, and an interactive film will be understood
as a representation of primarily prerecorded moving-image sequences,
the display of which can be affected by the audience or a performer. The
terms user and audience will be employed to refer to those attending the
playout of an interactive film—others have struggled to find more applicable
terms, examples include vuser (Seaman, 1999), viewser (Roach, 1995;
Daly, 2010), participant (Feingold, 1995), and doer (Davenport and Bradley,
1997). Where the spectatorial aspect of viewing has particular significance,
the term interactive cinema will be used.1
Whether fiction or nonfiction, art or game, interactive films require moving
image content in the form of prerecorded sequences—as opposed to
real-time manipulation of video, which will not be discussed here. Most
popularly, these sequences are filmed as live action using real cameras and
actors and locations, although this is by no means obligatory—for example
in their category of interactive film in Remediation, Bolter and Grusin (1999)
take as case studies the games Myst and The Last Express, both of which
are composed of synthetic or graphical imagery. Nevertheless, it is hardly
surprising that the majority of interactive films use enacted drama, not only
because fiction film is a dominant mode of audiovisual culture in contemporary
society but also because to creators it represents the greatest chance of
catching public attention and achieving financial success. Interactive cinema
started as an entertaining means to add novelty to the traditional fiction film
in a predigital era in which facilitating audience interaction was much more
difficult to achieve than today.
2. THE EARLY DAYS
Interactive cinema got off to a false start in 1961 with William Castle’s film
Mr. Sardonicus, which was advertised as featuring a ‘Punishment Poll.’ This was
a gimmick that enabled audience members to hold up a piece of paper printed
with an image of a fist with thumb sticking out, which could be held either
thumbs up or thumbs down before the final reel of the film was shown in order
to decide whether the Sardonicus character should be pardoned or, as described
in the film, ‘made to suffer, and suffer, and suffer.’ Although the elements of
what we might now call an interface were there (the thumb visualisation was
intuitive, the paper sheet could be used for both ‘yes’ and ‘no’ votes, and the
feature was inexpensive). Castle had neither the budget nor inclination to find
any technical solution to show each of the two potential endings, and the poll
was in fact a simulation. According to Castle’s biography (Law, 2000) only the
‘suffer’ ending was made and shown every time, Castle being seemingly content
with the Punishment Poll as a gimmick to attract curious audiences.2
Originating in Czechoslovakia, and almost certainly without influence
from the Punishment Poll, Kinoautomat was the world’s first interactive cinema
designed to facilitate greater engagement with the theatrical audience.
It debuted during the six months of Expo ‘67 in Montreal where it garnered
much publicity and entertained 67,000 visitors. Although it was the brainchild
of Radúz 􀃽in􀃾era, the project was a collaboration among numerous
talented individuals on all fronts. It involved live actors performing in tandem
with a projected nonlinear film entitled One Man and His House in a custombuilt
123-seat cinema with a red and green push button box attached to every
seat. At several times in the performance audiences were offered a choice
of two narrative alternatives and could push either button to indicate their
choice, the sequence corresponding to the majority vote being subsequently
projected. Kinoautomat employed an apparatus that was more ingenious
than innovative; it was based on electromechanical-analogue technology.
Wires running from the seats converged into a panel of telephone-style relays
that tallied votes and fed signals to an illuminated scoreboard. The projection
room had three synchronised 35mm projectors running simultaneously for
the main film, and at the moments of choice two additional 16mm projectors
were directed to the sidewalls. Additionally, a shutter system showed either of
two competing film segments, the narrative structure being a recombinant one
in which both possible options converged their story arcs to the same point.3
Kinoautomat was scaled up in size and shown at Expos in 1968 and 1974
and had a season in Prague in 1971, but no change in technology advanced
the concept. In 1981, at the Portopia exhibition in Kobe, a new film was
presented using the same basic hardware, but by then a fundamentally new
technology had arrived which proved revolutionary for the interactive film:
the laserdisc.4 Conventional film projection had a final roll of the dice just
as laserdisc was taking hold in the early 1980s with fledgling systems that
used special (retrofittable) lens/shutter assemblies that could show either of
two films printed in split-screen on conventional 35mm film, or that utilised
two projectors.5 In 1983, a film called Goodbye Cruel World was shown on
this system (named ‘Reactivision’ and ‘Choice-A-Rama’) and described in
Inc. magazine as follows:
At various points in the less than compelling plot, a comic appears on
screen to offer the audience four choices about which way the story
line should go. The audience whoops and hollers to indicate its preferences,
while a multicolored electronic totem pole at the screen’s side
registers the level of their appreciation. The choice that registers highest
on the pole is threaded into the projector, and the film continues.
(L.M.S., 1984)
Although the shift away from film projection was inevitable, this remains
historically significant in that it represents the first time that a public interactive
cinema screening made significant use of another emerging technology,
the microcomputer—in this case arranged to detect and respond to input
from an external microphone.
3. A REVOLUTION OCCURS
The early 1980s heralded a fundamental new era in which creators could
for the first time experiment with a nonlinear delivery system for video
footage, a 30cm diameter optical disc known as a videodisc or laserdisc,6
while simultaneously benefitting from continuing advances in desktop computer
technology. The laserdisc remained in use until the late 1990s when
it was superseded by another optical disc, this time offering digital video—
the DVD. The essential qualities of laserdisc were that it offered reasonable
video quality, which could be accessed nonlinearly, was a consumer
product (although it never reached high market penetration), and could be
adapted for a computer interface enabling custom-made interactive installations,
games and exhibits. Fiction film inevitably continued its flirtation
with the nonlinear, some of the earliest commercially available discs being
murder-mystery dramas/games7 that were often played as social events
hosted as parlour games by the small number of households that actually
owned a laserdisc player. By 1995, Interfilm was projecting the laserdiscencoded
films Mr Payback, Ride for Your Life and I’m Your Man into small
cinema rooms with seats equipped with 3-button joysticks that could be
used at certain moments to cast a vote—almost a facsimile of the staging
of Kinoautomat, which ironically was still being shown at that time in its
final incarnation (Cinéautomate) at Futuroscope.8 What was truly revolutionary
about laserdisc was that it immediately opened up the interactive
film to genres other than fiction. One of the first explorations of the true
nonlinear potential of laserdisc was The Aspen Movie Map (MIT Machine
Architecture Group, 1979–81), which organised filmed car journeys around
the grid-like streets of Aspen into a navigable entity, with additional factual
detail available when the façade of certain buildings had been reached. This
matrix structure of video scenes could never have been possible with earlier
technologies. The MIT group involved in its creation included Michael
Naimark, who subsequently produced numerous videodisc installations
that allowed navigation of filmed geographical territories in pursuit of what
became known as surrogate travel or a movie map.9 In the field of media art,
Lynn Hershmann was an early adopter of laserdisc technology: her Lorna
installation (1979–1984) described itself onscreen as “the world’s first interactive
video art disc game,” although it was clearly designed for the art gallery
rather than the gaming arcade. In 1990 the first computer arcade game
to cost a dollar a play was the live-action Mad Dog MacCree (American
Laser Games) which caused a brief sensation because it offered image quality
(scenes filmed with costumed actors in a Wild West film set) that was far
superior to pixel or vector-based products on the market at the time.10 The
game consists almost entirely of laserdisc video sequences shown on a large
monitor, the player standing a metre or so away from the screen and shooting
with a model revolver at the filmic image of on-screen actors playing evil
gunmen who appear in unexpected places at unexpected times.
The arrival of laserdisc opened up a new area of exploration in at least
one other area, that of experimental film and video—the exploration of
the nature of the moving image in its own right. One of its most notable
early proponents was Grahame Weinbren whose writings, as well as whose
own works such as Sonata (early 1990s) and The Erl King (1983–86, with
Roberta Friedman), elevated the analysis of interactive cinema into higher
aesthetic territory. Weinbren explained the importance of this early nonlinear
video delivery technology thus:
It is 1981. They show me a videodisc. They explain what it is and how
it works. And I realize that the language, the possibilities, the significance
of cinema is forever changed.
(Weinbren, 1997)
Weinbren outlined his vision of interactive cinema, a cinema based on the
interweaving of strong narrative strands, in his seminal essay “In the Ocean
of Streams of Story” (Weinbren, 1995). He was, however, by no means
alone in striving to discover the ramifications of the ‘Revolution of Random
Access’ as it was taking place; experimental filmmaker Malcolm le Grice,
for example, was using microcomputer technology to examine cinematic
nonlinearity, although his interest did not extend to an examination of interactivity
in its own right.11
4. A PROLIFERATION OF INTERFACES
There is an interesting visual device employed in Weinbren’s Sonata—
achieved with custom programming assistance from his brother Jon—when,
towards the end of the film, it is possible to move one’s finger horizontally
across the represented surface of the film causing a real-time ‘wipe’ between
two competing video streams. Technically speaking, this highlights two other
factors that were also being investigated in the 1980s and 90s: the utilisation
of unusual or intuitive physical interfaces as a means of user choice and the
custom-coding of computer software to create bespoken solutions.
In many cases the interface technology already existed and was appropriated
to the demands of the interactive film: The Aspen Movie Map, The Erl
King and Sonata all originally used touchscreen;12 Lorna used a handset
remote; Mad Dog McCree used an optical gun; and Interfilm used joysticks.
The fact that so many of these devices were better suited to personal choice
and expression rather than group interaction was reflected in a noticeable
dip in interest in the latter which only seemed to pick up once the Internet
was fully established (and in this case the large audience groups were
online and not physically co-present). Other than Interfilm, a notable exception
to examining group interaction was the Cinematrix system (Carpenter,
1993–4) using computer vision to detect response from audiences holding
reflective handheld wands as input devices.
With more and more interface hardware becoming available as well as
the means to deliver video nonlinearly, the missing part of the puzzle was a
system to process the inputs and control the outputs—a role for which the
personal computer was ideal, even though it was not until the mid-90s that
affordable computers could deliver acceptable-quality video in their own
right. Computers could also remember audience activity and could exhibit
random behaviour; hence the interactive film began to appear a little more
intelligent and unpredictable. For most of the 1980s it was more or less
essential to have assistance from programmers and technical specialists, but
Apple’s HyperCard introduced in 1987 allowed creators a certain amount
of autonomy since it required limited programming ability to use its inbuilt
high-level language HyperTalk to control video delivery from a laserdisc
player or from hard disk. Luc Courchesne, originally studying in the MIT
Film/Video section and joining the MIT Media Lab at its inception in 1985,
used the HyperCard-HyperTalk-laserdisc triumvirate for a series of highly
influential interactive film installations ranging from Portrait One (1989) to
Landscape One (1997). After HyperCard, other so-called authoring software
began to appear (such as Macromedia Director) and desktop computers
began to do away with the need for laserdisc players by using their own
proprietary digital video file formats such as Apple’s QuickTime technology
(1991).
5. CENTRES OF GRAVITY
The MIT Media Lab opened in 1985, followed by the founding of Glorianna
Davenport’s Interactive Cinema (IC) research group. Coincidentally or not,
Luc Courchesne recalls the first systematic use of interactive in the cinematic
context occurring around the same time: “What we then called ‘polylinear
storytelling’ or ‘reconfigurable video’ was renamed shortly after ‘interactive
video’” (Courchesne, 2002). IC opened enquiry to all relevant aspects of
interaction with visual narrative, not only producing innovative projects and
technologies but publishing (and publicising) widely and running an active
academic programme. Importantly, IC was influenced by the documentary
rather than the dramatic narrative tradition. Contour, developed in 1995 for
Boston: Renewed Vistas, was a generic interface enabling users to customise
their viewing of a themed database of documentary video material, and
Jerome B. Wiesner: A Random Walk through the Twentieth Century (1995)
extended the concept to the web, then in its infancy, allowing the database not
only to be manipulated in a browser but to be augmented via online contributions.
Carol Strohecker’s A Different Train of Thought (Strohecker, 1986)
showed the potential of the interactive film in creating a personal type of
video narrative based on autobiographical experiences and self-expression—
an approach that would later become commonplace once technological
improvements and cost reductions democratised the means of production. In
this work small icons, functioning as hyperlinks, appear occasionally under
the main video representation—a device that became a frequent design element
of later products (IC’s Elastic Charles of 1988–89 called them micons)
including the Korsakow authoring system launched in 2000 which itself
became particularly popular for use with nonfictional video content.13
As well as pioneering the use of video databases and keywords, the algorithmic
control of disparate media elements was investigated at IC and the
term emergent narrative14 was brought to prominence by Tinsley Galyean
in his doctoral thesis of 1995.15 This concept leads to a whole branch of
interactive cinema continuing to the present day in which the algorithmdatabase
plays a major role, an important proponent being Marsha Kinder
with the Labyrinth Project (1997). Lev Manovich’s The Language of New
Media, with its discussion of database cinema and assertion that “the new
media object consists of one or more interfaces to a database of multimedia
material” (Manovich, 2001, p. 227), further popularised the concept and his
installation Soft Cinema16 represents a classic example.
Although in 2004 the IC group at Media Lab broadened into Media
Fabrics, the ZKM in Karlsruhe has continued to nurture—amongst other
projects—interactive cinema, not least through the numerous artist-inresidence
projects it has supported along with cutting-edge technical assistance
and equipment. The ZKM Media Museum still displays key works by
Courchesne, Hershman and Naimark described earlier. Other specialist centres
have more recently been founded, in particular the iCinema Centre for
Interactive Cinema Research at the University of New South Wales, which
was directed by Jeffrey Shaw from 2003 until 2009.
6. CHANGING FORMATS
The 1990s passed as a technology interregnum, as laserdisc faded to obscurity
and other optical disc formats came and went until the DVD became a
universal standard, whilst at the same time the Internet became widespread
and Apple’s QuickTime technology brought video to the desktop computer
where it could be stored on ever-cheaper hard drives.17 There was a lot
of discussion of interactive television at this time, with little to show in
terms of actual products except for some television dramas created with
multiform plots and shown simultaneously on two or more channels.18
A notable exception is Akvaario, identified by Manovich as an early example
of database narrative.19 Video CD (created in 1993) was the first format for
fitting a film on a 120mm disc, whilst Philips CD-I technology spawned
Voyeur and Voyeur II interactive film games during its short existence.
Domestic games consoles were offering full-motion video (FMV), Night
Trap (1992–1994) being one of the first games consisting almost exclusively
of live-action filmed footage and The X-Files Game (1999) one of the last.20
As processor power increased, the limitations to gameplay of using prerecorded
video sequences made such games anachronistic, but not before the
term interactive movie had been used to describe the mid-1990s fad of computer
games in which gameplay was interspersed with passive, live-action
filmed sequences.
Several factors came together in the early 1990s to bring the creation of
interactive films within the range and budget of the average desktop computer
user. The advent of QuickTime technology, combined with fast hard
drives on which to store the video files, brought digital video to the home
computer, and although the size and quality was originally highly limited,
it improved steadily.21 One could film with a domestic camcorder, digitise
the sequences, manipulate and edit them with commercially available
video editing software, and add interactivity/nonlinearity using multimedia
authoring software such as HyperCard, Supercard and Director. A new type
of production arose, often experimental or with a personal touch, made
with modest means, typified by projects such as HyperCafé (Balcom, Smith
and Sawhney, 1996) and Chris Hales’ 1995 touchscreen installation film
The Twelve Loveliest Things I Know.22 Interactive filmmaking could then
be taught in hands-on fashion at moderately equipped higher education
establishments,23 which had themselves seen an expansion of degree courses
specialising in new media and interaction. Opportunities also increased to
exhibit finished work in specialised festivals and other events. CD-ROM
discs, offering data storage and distribution of 650MB, proved a useful format
for these individual creators, and the Artist CD-ROM became a discrete
and recognisable genre of new media art.
The most durable delivery mechanisms for video that emerged during the
1990s were the DVD and Internet. The former had the potential for interactivity
built into its specification—on-screen menus allow choices to be made
to switch to a different scene, and angles can be used to select from sequences
running in parallel scenes. Nevertheless, few commercially available DVD
titles have been specifically made as interactive films. Tender Loving Care
and Point of View (Aftermath Media, 1998, 2001) were trailblazers; both
were structured as video episodes interspersed with on-screen questionnaires.
Bernard Perron (2003) conducted a systematic study of the former title,
analysing in depth the activity required from a user in order to complete the
interactive experience. Switching (Oncotype, 2003) provided 140 minutes of
fiction material organised as intersecting video loops in a structure that its
makers described as a Noodlefilm24 because every distinct video sequence
is hyperlinked to other video sequences throughout its temporal duration.
Late Fragment, coproduced by The Canadian Film Centre and National Film
Board of Canada in 2007 and Über Life made in Serbia in 2010 also stand
out as purpose-made interactive films produced for DVD. The fact is that
whereas a large proportion of commercial DVD (and Blu-ray) titles do offer
interactive features, these are separate entities and not an integral part of
the main film. Developments in interactive filmmaking have instead, in the
21st century, mostly occurred due to the growth in capability of the Internet,
the arrival of new devices and platforms, and a growth in the range and
sophistication of interface technology.
7. A NEW CENTURY
Although bandwidth limitations restricted the use of video in the early days
of the Internet, by the mid-2000s video was commonplace on the web and
the video-sharing website YouTube started operations in 2005. Advertisers
were quick to harness online video. The Subservient Chicken (2004), for
instance, allowed users to type in commands to an on-screen video of a
man in a chicken suit who could perform around 300 prerecorded actions.
Although the experience was far from seamless and there was no depth
to the nonlinear structure, it resulted in numerous imitations and variations.
By 2011, the Land Rover brand was advertising online with a short
interactive film entitled Being Henry, the endings of which were portraying
a vehicle customised in a way that reflected the choices made by the user
whilst traversing the branching structure. Fiction filmmaking has asserted
its interactive online presence with examples such as The Outbreak,25 a
zombie survival film of 2008, and Crimeface, a Webby Award winner of the
same year. In 2008, YouTube extended its functionality to allow annotations
to be positioned on video content—essentially acting as hyperlinks to
other YouTube videos—making the creation of a branching interactive film
a trivial operation requiring few specialised skills. Although traversing an
interactive film made in this way is highly anticinematic and lacks flow due
to the continual presence of the YouTube visual interface, more interactive
films (however simple in structure and content) are being implemented here,
and they are being made by a wider profile of creators than have ever before
made history in the field.
Interactive music videos have become a burgeoning online presence and
now range from annotated YouTube branching narratives (such as “The
Streets” Computers and Blues music album of 2011) to those using crowdsourcing
(such as The Johnny Cash Project26) or incorporating personal
data obtained by voluntary upload or taken from webcam, Twitter and
Facebook accounts, or even Google Maps.27 Interactive web documentary
has also emerged after the mid-2000s as a distinct genre, although it is usually
analysed in terms of its collaborative and cross-media characteristics
rather than its directly interactive ones. In fact there is no longer any simple
definition of what constitutes an interactive film, as audiences may be active
in other ways than selecting from premade content. A popular YouTube
activity is to post homemade remixes or reinterpretations of video content
uploaded by others, and more structured projects such as Perry Bard’s Man
with a Movie Camera: the Global Remake28 (2007) invite their communities
to upload personal material to achieve a defined yet malleable creative
goal. Henry Jenkins recognised this as “a shift from real-time interaction
toward asynchronous participation” (Jenkins, 2006, p. 59), whilst Kristen
Daly proposes a “Cinema 3.0: The Interactive-Image,” in which films “put
the viewer to work” (Daly, 2010, p. 86) with “interaction in the form of
user-participation and interpretation” (Daly, 2010, p. 82). Perhaps the key
issue then is that interactivity itself has changed, and “should no longer
be defined by a specific formal language prescribed by the vocabulary of
the 1990s. Today, most of all, it is a set of strategies that can be situated in
multiple contexts. …”29
Developments in technology have inevitably broadened the range of
devices that can be harnessed as interaction technology and as media viewing
platforms. Projects that might previously have stood out by utilising an
unusual physical interface are now no longer special. The field of physical
computing—characterised by microcontroller boards such as Arduino—
enable electronic sensors to be employed to detect all manner of user activity.
Michael Lew’s Office Voodoo (Lew, 2003) permits two users to each shake
and squeeze a voodoo doll figurine to control the interplay between two
office workers portrayed onscreen. Biofeedback data was used by Pia Tikka
in the multiscreen fiction film installation Obsession (Tikka, 2008) to control
the playback of video sequences from a database under the control of
an algorithm informed by a study of the writings of Sergei Eisenstein. British
company MyndPlay30 has produced several short branching-narrative films
aimed at entertainment or personal well-being that are controlled by input
from commercially available EEG brainwave headsets. Game console interfaces
such as the Wiimote and Kinect can recognise physical gestures, and
the touchscreen—previously a somewhat neglected and technically limited
interface—is standard on many devices and can detect sophisticated actions
and multiple touches, as explored in the Touching Stories package of short
interactive films commissioned for the iPad in 2010.
Although dedicated interactive cinema theatres have never been widely
established, interaction for large groups of co-present audience members
has benefited from the growth in personally owned mobile devices and
from cheaper and easier-to-use technologies and software techniques. Short,
interactive screenings have occasionally been used to entertain (and usually
advertise to) audiences awaiting the main feature in a traditional cinema
environment. Between 2003 and 2009, “Cause and Effect” toured a programme
of short interactive films, each with a different interaction mode,
using inexpensive technology that could be carried in a rucksack and
installed in freeform spaces.31 Audiences need no longer be instructed to
turn off their mobile devices at the cinema: phone calling has been used
in the Last Call (2010) (although only one audience member could exert
influence), a text message may be used to convey a choice or combination
of choices, and smart phones allow interaction via online access. Webbased
audience response systems can now utilise mobile phone, Twitter and
the web to allow audience groups to vote and express themselves in real
time using their personal devices. Despite these advances in technology, if
all the audience can do is vote to choose by majority what happens next,
then the creative potential of the interactive film will have changed little
since Kinoautomat in 1967. Those projects that find a more imaginative
correlation between the on-screen story and the activity required by the
audience (often using ingenious interaction modes) undoubtedly offer more
engaging experiences, the technique itself having been described as ‘movie
as interface.’32
8. CONCLUSION
Interactive cinema has never become mainstream partly because the terminology
used to describe it has been varied and the technology required to
deliver it has been under constant change, creating a lack of homogeneity.
Although suitable platforms for interactive cinema are now widespread, the
experience of interactivity has become a daily necessity, and the possibility
to interact to change the representation of a film is no longer the novelty
that it once was. Hyperlinked YouTube branching films are proliferating,
and more people now possess devices that can record video than ever before.
An interactive film is no longer the recognisably distinct item that it once
was. It has blended into a wider range of phenomena and now requires a
much broader definition, which includes personalisation and collaboration.
Audiences have the potential to contribute to the filmic content itself, not
just how it is finally manipulated.
Developments in technologies have necessarily been a major factor in the
evolution of interactive filmmaking and it is possible to identify a film-based
phase, a laserdisc (and subsequently CDROM and DVD) phase, and the rise
of the personal computer and the Internet. QuickTime technology was also
important in making it possible for modestly equipped individuals to enter
the arena of interactive filmmaking. A huge variety of inexpensive electronic
devices can now be used as interface technology, and interactive film shows
can easily be staged without the need to construct special cinemas.
On a final note, there is now the sense that interactive cinema is aware
of—and actively preserving—its history, in tune with a wider interest in
new media history and media archaeology. Kinoautomat of 1967 has been
researched, reconstructed and released on DVD, and reperformed in cinema
theatres. The importance of preserving the functionality of projects—made
relatively recently but with archaic technological requirements—has become
recognised and acted upon. Several historically important installations such
as Weinbren’s The Erl King are being preserved or emulated so that the
original use can be accurately experienced in perpetuity (Weinbren, n.d.).
Interactive Cinema now has a secure history—what the future holds is a
branching narrative that has yet to be traversed.