Board of Regents of the University of Wisconsin System
Cyberpunk and the Dilemmas of Postmodern Narrative: The Example of William Gibson
Author(s): Claire Sponsler
Source: Contemporary Literature, Vol. 33, No. 4 (Winter, 1992), pp. 625-644
Published by: University of Wisconsin Press
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/1208645
Accessed: 28-01-2016 08:11 UTC

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at http://www.jstor.org/page/
info/about/policies/terms.jsp
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content
in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship.
For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Board of Regents of the University of Wisconsin System and University of Wisconsin Press are collaborating with
JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Contemporary Literature.

http://www.jstor.org

This content downloaded from 147.8.31.43 on Thu, 28 Jan 2016 08:11:25 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

CLAIRE

SPONSLER

Cyberpunkand the Dilemmasof Postmodern
Narrative:The Example of William Gibson

n recentyearssciencefictionhaswithsomesuccessstruggled
against its ghettoization as lowbrow genre fiction. Readers
and critics have defended science fiction as having not only
a tradition of its own but also considerable overlap with
modernist and postmodernist literature. Simultaneously, theorists
like Fredric Jameson, Jean Baudrillard, and Donna Haraway have
turned to SF as, in Annette Kuhn's words, "a privileged cultural
site for enactments of the postmodern condition" (178). Indeed, for
many cultural critics, SF has become the pre-eminent literary genre
of the postmodern era, since it alone seems capable of understanding the rapid technological and cultural changes occurring in late
capitalist, postindustrial society.
In spite of this highbrow interest in science fiction, borders are
still policed, and the SF ghetto endures. Even an apologist for SF
like Darko Suvin can say dismissively that only "5 to 10 percent of
SF" is "aesthetically significant" in contrast to the ninety to ninetyfive percent that is "strictly perishable stuff" (vii). As Roger Luckhurst notes, in the postmodern discourse about SF, science fiction is
seen as borrowing from the mainstream "always belatedly, derivatively, and in degraded form" (362). SF may have acquired a new
visibility outside its own coterie, especially among theorists, but old
value hierarchies still work to keep SF books out of the hands of
high- and middlebrow readers. Hence, like the New Wave and ecofeminist SF of the 1960s and 1970s, cyberpunk, the most significant
development in science fiction in the 1980s, is not widely known
0010-7484/92/0004-0625
$1.50
Contemporary Literature XXXIII, 4
? 1992 by the Board of Regents of the University of Wisconsin System

This content downloaded from 147.8.31.43 on Thu, 28 Jan 2016 08:11:25 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

626

*

CONTEMPORARY

LITERATURE

among readers and critics who consider themselves otherwise conversant with current literature.
This has been the case even for the best known of the cyberpunk
writers, William Gibson. Although Peter Fitting notes that Gibson's
work "has attractedan audience from outside, people who read it as
a poetic evocation of life in the late eighties rather than as science
fiction" (308), and although Gibson has been rightly hailed as putting cyberpunk on the map, it must be admitted that in most literary
circles he remains a rather obscure object of acclaim. His earliest
fiction-short stories written in the late seventies and early eightieswas confined to genre publications such as Omni, and his first two
novels-the award-winning Neuromancer
(1984) along with its sequel
CountZero(1986)-were published by the science fiction house Ace
Books, as was BurningChrome(1986), a collection of his short stories.
Only with his third novel, Mona Lisa Overdrive(1988), issued by
Bantam Books and offered as a Quality PaperbackBook Club selection, did Gibson finally reach a wider audience. For most of his
career Gibson has been a genre writer writing for a genre audience.
Unfamiliar though it may be to mainstream readers, Gibson's
work nonetheless deserves attention from anyone interested in the
narrative predicaments faced by contemporary American fiction.
Like Thomas Pynchon, a writer he cites as a formative influence,
Gibson is notable for taking seriously recent developments in technology, culture, and socioeconomic organization, attempting in his
stories to convey what he sees as their inevitable consequences. The
future his novels imagine is one in which multinationalcorporations
control global economies, urban blight has devoured the countryside, crime and violence are inescapable events of urban life, and
technology has shaped new modes of consciousness and behavior.
Set not in a distant and alien universe but in a recognizable, nearfuture permutation of our own world, Gibson's stories postulate
what our reality might all too soon be like and experiment with
narrativemodes of enacting these changes.
Spawned by mass market "hard"science fiction, influenced by
the work of New Wave writers like Samuel R. Delany, J. G. Ballard,
MichaelMoorcock, and Norman Spinrad as well as by the postmodern writers William S. Burroughs and Thomas Pynchon, and developing in the eighties as an exploration of human experience within

This content downloaded from 147.8.31.43 on Thu, 28 Jan 2016 08:11:25 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

SPONSLER

*

627

the context of media-dominated, postindustrial, late capitalist society, cyberpunk is in many ways quintessentially postmodern.1 In
the hands of writers such as Emma Bull, Pat Cadigan, George Alec
Effinger, K. W. Jeter,Rudy Rucker,Lewis Shiner, John Shirley, and
Bruce Sterling, cyberpunk typically presents a montage of surface
images, cultural artifacts, and decentered subjects moving through
a shattered, affectless landscape. Its protagonists are antiheroes set
adriftin a world in which there is no meaning, no security, no affection, and no communal bonds-except for those they themselves
tenuously create. Antifoundational, skeptical of authority, suspicious about the possibility of human autonomy, and fascinated by
the way technology and material objects shape consciousness and
motivate behavior, cyberpunk would seem to square with postmodern culture as it has been amply described by Baudrillard,Jameson,
and Jean-FranqoisLyotard, among others.2
The problem this streetwise science fiction faces, however, is one
it shares with other postmodern narratives-how to shape plot and
agency in a way that matches the postmodern ideology and aesthetic it embraces. The ease with which Gibson and other cyberpunk writers are able to create a postmodern surface world-one
that compellingly inscribes technological and cultural changesclashes with their difficulty in finding an equivalent way of handling
plot and agency. As Gibson's novels reveal, cyberpunk's failures, as
much as its successes, offer an important and overlooked commentary on some of the dilemmas of postmodern narrative.

Where Gibson's narrative portrayal of technological and cultural
change is most successful is unquestionably in the description of
the object world, including the treatment of setting. The oftenquoted opening sentence of Neuromancer-"Thesky above the port
was the color of television, tuned to a dead channel"-immediately
clues us in to one of the most effective features of Gibson's handling
1. For an introduction to cyberpunk, see the short stories collected in Mirrorshades:
The CyberpunkAnthology, edited by Bruce Sterling. Sterling's preface to this collection
provides a useful overview of the cyberpunk movement from the perspective of an insider.
2. For a general discussion of cyberpunk's connection with postmodernism and, in
particular, its deconstructive features, see Hollinger.

This content downloaded from 147.8.31.43 on Thu, 28 Jan 2016 08:11:25 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

628

C
CONTEMPORARY

LITERATURE

of the impact of the technological revolution. As this sentence reveals, the natural world in Gibson's writings is refigured as technological, cybernetic, and machinelike. Trees, sky, plants, animals,
even humans are identified, described, and apprehended only
through the language and images of technology, which provides the
dominant paradigm for the mediation of reality. In a typical phrase
from CountZero, for example, moths circling an outdoor light are
described as "strob[ing] crooked orbits around the halogen tube"
(34). So pervasive has technology become that it has altered human
perception of the natural world, making that world describableand
indeed even visible only within a frame provided by technology.
The impact of technology on the construction of reality is adroitly
played out in the description of locale. Gibson's descriptions of the
Sprawl, Chiba, Freeside, the Villa Straylight, Dog Solitude, and
cyberspace itself offer a glimpse of a breathtakingly new place, a
two-dimensional reality constructed out of teeming and shifting
signifiers. At the level of the cityscape, on the surface, where the
jumping activity of the street pulsates, Gibson's work is a tour de
force of the postmodern aesthetic brought to life. This is a setting
that mimics technology, owing its very being to technological innovations. Night City, for example, Neuromancer's
"outlaw zone" for
is
a
that
exists
less as streets
"burgeoning technologies" (11),
place
and buildings than as itself "a field of data"informed by "the dance
of biz, information interacting, data made flesh in the mazes of the
black market"(16). In this setting, not only has the network of information become a commodity, as Lyotard predicted, but even more
dramatically it has become a metaphor for objects which now depend on it for their tangibility. Even the humans caught up in this
maze are treated like bits of data darting around in the network:
Night City was like a deranged experiment in social Darwinism, designed by a bored researcher who kept one thumb permanently on the
fast-forward button. Stop hustling and you sank without a trace, but
move a little too swiftly and you'd break the fragile surface tension of the
black market; either way, you were gone, with nothing left of you but
some vague memory in the mind of a fixture like Ratz, though heart or
lungs or kidneys might survive in the service of some stranger with New
Yen for the clinic tanks.

(7)

This content downloaded from 147.8.31.43 on Thu, 28 Jan 2016 08:11:25 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

SPONSLER

*

629

Anyone who stops moving, breaks the flow of information, or falls
out of the delicatebalance requiredby this cyberneticorderis spewed
out of the system entirely-an eventuality that is commensurate
with death and dismemberment.
Linked with this network of information that defines and delimits human existence, Gibson's novels display a postmodern flash of
cultures and languages jumbled together, a polyglot world of objects and discourses. The Sprawl, Night City, Chiba, Freeside, and
every other zone, though differentiated by name and geographic
place, all ultimately blend together in a panculture that has by and
large effaced all local or ethnic differences. Significantly, although
the dominant culture always looms in the background-in the multinational corporations (the Maas-Biolabs and Hosakas) as well as in
the form of a few powerful individuals (the Tessier-Ashpools and
Josef Vireks of the world)-the surface attention is all on the counterculture, from orbiting Rastafariansto punk street gangs to mincome Projectvoodoo worshipers. It is these marginal figures caught
up in the "dance of biz" who hold Gibson's attention and whose
interconnections and activities supply much of the narrative interest. This focus on what Bruce Sterling refers to as "the modern pop
underground" (xi) deflected through technology marks one of the
innovations of cyberpunk.
In addition to his interest in the marginalized, Gibson's pack-rat
eclecticism-which appropriates a whole range of contemporary
cultural material drawn from television, technical and military jargon, modern art and music, film noir,and the hard-boiled detective
story-also marks his novels as postmodern. His writing is a web of
allusions, obliquely and casually interwoven. References to art
(Dali, Kandinski, and Gaudf), to music (LaurieAnderson, Bob Marley, Lou Reed, and the Meat Puppets), and to fiction (J. G. Ballard,
Dashiell Hammett, and John le Carrd)abound. Gibson throws out a
seemingly indiscriminate collage of borrowings, a world made from
the fragments of other worlds, describing it all in a tech-noir language perfectly suited to the material.
Focusing on appearances and surfaces, Gibson's fiction exhibits
a calculated obsession with the object world. A surprising amount
of narrative space is devoted to descriptions of clothing, human
bodies and faces, the interiors and exteriors of buildings, and man-

This content downloaded from 147.8.31.43 on Thu, 28 Jan 2016 08:11:25 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

630

*

CONTEMPORARY

LITERATURE

made artifacts of all kinds. Here, for example, in a digression unnecessary to the plot, is Gibson describing a "vacation module"
once owned by Turner,a characterin CountZero:this module was
"solar-poweredand French-built, its seven-meter body like a wingless housefly sculpted in polished alloy, its eyes twin hemispheres
of tinted, photosensitive plastic" (46). Tellingly, many of these objects are seen as the detritus of civilization, decaying remnants of an
otherwise demolished, meaningless, and inaccessible past. This
treatment of found objects from the past is clearly an instance of the
"past as pastiche" typical of the postmodern sense of history so
persuasively analyzed by Jameson.3 In a calculated twist that underscores the value Gibson places on these seemingly worn-out
and useless items, cast-off scraps of earlier times resurface in Count
Zeroas prized art works that Marly Krushkhova has been hired to
traceback to their maker.In MonaLisaOverdrive,Slick Henry welds
together a similar assortment of the jetsam of civilization, transforming discarded metal parts into massive robot-sculptures that
inhabita borderzone between art, humanity,and technology.Though
now quite literally junk and rubbish, the worth of this detritus from
the past nevertheless lingers on in its status as object of display and
appropriation.
In sum, this vividly displayed surface reality-its settings and its
objects-is perhaps the most immediately striking feature of Gibson's books, especially for a first-time reader. The details of his
imagined near-future world, in the words of one reviewer, "tumble
off the page like the jump-cut images of music videos" (Grant41). In
their treatment of setting, Gibson's novels present a "totally designed perceptual experience," to borrow Janet Bergstrom's description of the film BladeRunner.As Bergstrom observes:
BladeRunnerhas the look, sound, and ambience of the totally designed
perceptual experience. It is built up out of unnaturally colored beams of
light and glowing neon shapes that activate parts of the screen space,
filtered through haze, shadows, smoke, steam, and rain. People use
3. Jamesoncharacterizesthe postmodernrelationshipwith history as one in which
the past is availableto the present only as a randompasticheof images, styles, and objects. As Jamesonlaments, "we seem condemned-toseek the historicalpast throughour
own pop images and stereotypes about that past, which itself remains forever out of
reach"("Postmodernismand ConsumerSociety"118).

This content downloaded from 147.8.31.43 on Thu, 28 Jan 2016 08:11:25 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

SPONSLER

*

631

degraded, hybrid languages, and costumes, to move in a disorderly,
decaying urban-industrial environment. Characters emerge out of this
delirium, sometimes competing with their environment for the spectator's attention.

(34)
Her description also accurately conveys the ambiance of Gibson's
novels. Glitzy, hip, slangy, and decadent, the object world of Gibson's fiction draws us irresistibly, the punk-trash style beckoning
enticingly. Gibson gives us a narrative version of our postmodern
consumer culture that, not surprisingly,engulfs us just as inexorably.
At first glance, this postmodern preoccupation with objects and
surfaces would seem to be matched by a similarly postmodern diminishing, flattening, and decentering of the human beings who
move across this object world. Gibson's work, like cyberpunk in
general, is typically praised by critics for its rewriting of subjectivity, human consciousness, and behavior made newly problematic by technology. VeronicaHollinger, for example, applauds "the
potential in cyberpunk for undermining concepts like 'subjectivity'
and 'identity'" (35). In particular, cyberpunk's infatuation with
boundary crossing, most evident in its transgression of the traditional boundaries between organic and inorganic, natural and artificial, human and machine, results in a decentering of the human
subject precisely of the sort seen by many chroniclers of our age as
the hallmarkof the postmodern condition. As Donna Harawaycontends, in the late twentieth century "we are all chimeras, theorized
and fabricated hybrids of machine and organism; in short, we are
cyborgs. The cyborg is our ontology; it gives us our politics" (174).
One way of reading cyberpunk, in fact, is as an extended investigation into the postmodern identification of man with machine.4 In
Gibson's novels, the human and the technological overlap nearly
endlessly. The human organism is adapted, enhanced, and preserved by technologies that invade and take over the body. Vatgrown flesh, the custom neurosurgery of the Chiba black clinics
that enhances reflexes, Nikon eye replacements to improve vision,
behind-the-ear carbon sockets for microsofts, and toothbud trans4. Fora discussion of the man-machinesymbiosis in science fictionwrittenbetween
1930and 1977,see Warrick.

This content downloaded from 147.8.31.43 on Thu, 28 Jan 2016 08:11:25 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

632

*

CONTEMPORARY

LITERATURE

plants to give humans the incisors of large carnivores blur the distinction between what is human and what is not. Personality substitutes like Armitage, human analogs like JuliusDeane, holographs
and constructs like those used by the artificialintelligences to communicate with humans, or chip-ghosts like Colin, who is a "MaasNeotek biochip personality-base programmed to aid and advise"
people (MonaLisa162) all transform the illusion of humanness into
the real thing-or make the distinction between the two nonsensical. In this treatment of the human body, Gibson echoes contemporary SF and horror, wherein, as Scott Bukatman notes, the body
has come to be narrated "as a site of exploration and transfiguration, through which an interface with an electronically based postmodern experience is inscribed" ("Postcards"343).
Similarly, individual identity, especially that based on appearance, evaporates in a world where plastic surgery can make anyone
look like a blend of the decade'smost popular media faces, or where
the members of a street gang can all be surgically altered to look
alike. Identity in this world is cast onto the surface of the body, but
where the body can be so readily redesigned and customized, conventional notions of individuality and selfhood become meaningless. Chameleonlike, the body imitates and even becomes its environment, as in the Panther Moderns' polycarbon suits that change
to match any background. No longer is the body capable of mirrorfor ining an autonomous, unique, interior self. In Neuromancer,
to
artist
Peter
is
able
create
the
stance,
holographic
holographic
images of himself that are indistinguishable from his actual self;
thus he can be in two or more places simultaneously. In a further
elaboration of identity-stretching, at the end of MonaLisaOverdrive
one of the characters,Mona, has been deliberately transformed into
another through a round of plastic surgery that sculpts her face into
the exact likeness of simstim star Angie Mitchell, hence disconcertingly presenting us with two Angies.
Just as physical appearance fails to determine the self, so too does
personal experience. Through Angie Mitchell and other simstim
stars, who are essentially organic camcorders recording their own
experiences through implanted cameras and auro-sensory recorders and then projecting those experiences onto the simstim screens
of millions of viewers, the sensations and experiences unique to

This content downloaded from 147.8.31.43 on Thu, 28 Jan 2016 08:11:25 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

SPONSLER

*

633

one human being-what would seem to define that person-are
transformed and projected via technology for the pleasure of countless others remote from the actual experience they participate in. In
for example, when Molly is breaking into the Sense/
Neuromancer,
Net research library to steal a computer disk, Case shares her experience through a simstim link. Not only can he view the whole
break-in through her eyes, he can feel it too: when she breaks her
leg, he feels the pain as if his own leg had been broken. In this
world, one's own experiences are no longer just one's own and offer
no mechanism for self-determination or self-definition. Troubling
as this is for identity, it also calls into question the ability to know
reality.As Marly remarks in CountZero:
The sinister thing about a simstim construct, really, was that it carried the
suggestion that any environment might be unreal, that the windows of
the shopfronts she passed now . .. might be figments. Mirrors, someone
had once said, were in some way essentially unwholesome; constructs
were more so, she decided.
(139-40)

This is a radically mediated world, where no one can trust that the
reality he or she encounters is ever really real. It is, tellingly, a world
much like Baudrillard'sdescription of our own, in which the individual "can no longer produce the limits of his own being, can no
longer play nor stage himself, can no longer produce himself as
mirror.He is now only a pure screen, a switching center for all the
networks of influence" (133).
Even death, that one event beyond all others that we might assume would put its signature on the individual, does not serve to
define human identity. Rather than marking the end of one person's life, death can be nearly infinitely evaded, with humans such
as Herr Virek or the Dixie Flatline being kept alive in machinelike
eternity in vats or as computer constructs. And even if an individual should happen to die, his or her experiences and knowledge can live on, passed from person to person. This is the way
that Angie Mitchell acquires most of her knowledge, from memories transmitted to her through the matrix of cyberspace, wordlessly communicated to her in the manner of this information about
Molly:

This content downloaded from 147.8.31.43 on Thu, 28 Jan 2016 08:11:25 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

634

*

CONTEMPORARY

LITERATURE

Molly, like the girl Mona, is SINless, her birth unregistered, yet around
her name (names) swarm galaxies of supposition, rumor, conflicting
data. Streetgirl, prostitute, bodyguard, assassin, she mingles on the
manifold planes with the shadows of heroes and villains whose names
mean nothing to Angie, though their residual images have long since
been woven through the global culture. (And this too belonged to 3Jane,
and now belongs to Angie.)
(MonaLisa239)

Memories have become interchangeable, detachable from the individual who originally possessed them and able to be passed along
to others. In the world of cyberpunk, as the science of genetics has
alreadysuggested to us, humans are but machines directedby coded
messages unknowable to consciousness, and anotherperson's memory tapes can be played by anyone's machine.
The concept of cyberspace also contributes to this decentering of
the subject. Cyberspace, a "consensual hallucination," is, in the
words of a children's show in Neuromancer,
"A graphic representation of data abstracted from the banks of every computer in the
human system. Unthinkable complexity.Lines of light ranged in the
nonspace of the mind, clusters and constellations of data. Like city
lights, receding" (51). More importantly, cyberspace unfolds a new
social and psychological space, one open to new patterns of human
behavior and interaction.5 It is in the realm of cyberspace that the
heroes of Gibson'snovels enter into a disembodied and egoless state.
They become, in a dead metaphor that CountZero'svoodoo loa bring
to life, "possessed," no longer themselves, transformedinto bodiless
beings whose selves become coterminous with the matrix around
them. "Beyond ego, beyond personality, beyond awareness," the
hero moves in the "mind-body interface granted him" in cyberspace
(Neuromancer
262). The console cowboy, when "jackedinto a custom
deck
that project[s] his disembodied consciousness into
cyberspace
the consensual hallucination that [is] the matrix" (Neuromancer
5),
moves in a realm where traditionalperceptions of corporeal identity
have no place. He might well, like Case, find himself walking along
a sandy beach talking to his now-dead girlfriend, when "in reality"
he is in his room jacked into his computer deck.
5. Foran analysisof cyberspaceas a new socialrealm,see Tomas.

This content downloaded from 147.8.31.43 on Thu, 28 Jan 2016 08:11:25 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

SPONSLER

*

635

In this world of blurred boundaries and decentered subjects, not
only do humans become machinelike, but the reverse also happens:
machines take on human qualities. Even such a relatively low-tech
object as a Braunmicrodrone-a sort of miniaturerobot-is described
in organic terms. It looks like "a stylized matte black daddy long188) and, emitting chirping sounds, tries like a
legs" (Neuromancer
sentient and even loyal creature to crawl up Case's leg to warn him
of approaching danger. More obviously, the characterof the Al-the
artificial intelligence-represented in Gibson's novels by Wintermute and Neuromancer, most fully blends these two states of the
organic and inorganic, calling into question along the way such
qualities as agency, motive, intentionality, and autonomy that are
supposedly exclusive to humans. Although the Dixie Flatline, who
is himself "just a bunch of ROM,"says to Case, "YourAI ... it ain't
no way human" (Neuromancer
131), the narrative makes quite clear
that AIs are far more than mere machines and in fact operate in
ways that are coded as strikingly human. They take on human appearance and exhibit what seem to be human desires and motivations. So, for example, the AI Neuromancer appears to Case in the
guise of a young boy walking on a deserted beach, wearing "ragged,
colorless shorts, limbs too thin against the sliding blue-gray of the
tide" (243). Characterslike Molly and Armitage may owe their peculiar abilities to cybernetics, but entities like Wintermute and Neuromancer, though artificial intelligences, aspire to be free, autonomous individuals complete with personalities. The attempt of these
AIs to merge into a single, more complete being is in fact the driving
force behind Neuromancer's
plot, the event that Molly, Case, and
have
been
hired
both to help and hinder.
Armitage
It is perhaps this role reversal between humans and machines
that most compellingly makes cyberpunk's case for the decentered
subject and, when coupled with the persistent boundary transgression and emphasis on the teeming world of signifiers, would seem
to define cyberpunk as a popular version of postmodern fiction. As
Bukatman observes, cyberpunk "effaces the borders between conscious and unconscious, physical and phenomenal realities, subject
and object, individual and group, reality and simulacrum, life and
death, body and subject, future and present" ("Postcards"351-52).

This content downloaded from 147.8.31.43 on Thu, 28 Jan 2016 08:11:25 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

636

*

CONTEMPORARY

LITERATURE

Unfortunately,the potential of cyberpunk as postmodern narrative,
the possibility of challenging the constitutive codes of our present
cultural moment, is largely negated by Gibson's failure to play out
at the level of plot and agency the implications of the two-dimensional aesthetic and the decentered individuals he has so successfully created. The surface style and the treatment of subjectivity
may be convincingly postmodern, but two crucial features of the
narrativeremain trapped in the conventions of realism. Partof Gibson's difficulty in handling plot and agency in a manner commensurate with his postmodern impulse undoubtedly derives from science fiction's well-worn reliance on an epistemology that hails from
the nineteenth-century realist novel, an epistemology that privileges cause-and-effect plot development and the unified humanist
subject. Both of these, belying the shimmering postmodern surface
Gibson presents us with, are formative features of his novels, increasingly so after Neuromancer.
The plots of Gibson's novels, in fact, rather predictably blend
adventure and detective story handling of pacing, event, and narrative progression. Typically,his protagonists are jarredout of some
crisis in their own lives and launched by unseen but powerful forces
on an adventure that involves the solving of a series of puzzles and
the surmounting of a number of intervening obstacles. Unlike Alain
Robbe-Grillet in The Erasers,Tom Stoppard in The Real Inspector
Hound, or Italo Calvino in If on a Winter'sNight a Traveler,Gibson
unfortunately does not problematize the adventure-detective plot.
In the end, like their countless detective-adventurer forebears, Gibson's protagonists succeed in their quest, not incidentally conquering their own demons along the way. This pattern is varied slightly
in CountZeroand Mona Lisa Overdrive,where Gibson experiments
with multiple plots, with the result that for at least part of each
novel we are kept in the dark about how the various charactersand
events connect and what they mean. Even in these novels, however,
the plots ultimately do come together, and Gibson gives us coherent, untroubling resolutions.
To give him credit, Gibson does attempt some innovations in
plotting. In a style that once again recalls postmodernism's typical
mode of pastiche, he tries to build his narratives in a visual, filmic
manner out of a montage of short takes that omit overt transitions

This content downloaded from 147.8.31.43 on Thu, 28 Jan 2016 08:11:25 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

SPONSLER

*

637

and provide few immediate clues as to who is speaking or where
new action is taking place. Within each chapter, he presents us with
a brief scene or moment of action, then flips to another place and
another event, connecting the two only by blank spaces in the text.
This technique works most effectively toward the end of Neuromancer
when Case, connected to Molly by a simstim link, literally flips back
and forth among three different scenes: her break-in into the Villa
Straylight, the virus attack on the AI's ice that is taking place in
cyberspace, and Case's "real"location, where he is jacked into his
computer deck in a Rastafarian"tugboat" anchored along Freeside.
The intended effect seems to be to convey a random, loosely connected, and indeterminate series of actions that accumulate only
obliquely into a sequence of meaningful events.
What one critic has called Gibson's "prose-collage technique"
(Grant 44) is, however, less random and more purposeful than it
might at first appear. All of these short takes are in fact driven by
underlying plots that move diachronically,following a linear progression from event to event. One thing quite literally leads to another; no scene turns out to have been truly random or unmotivated. Instead, everything builds smoothly and inexorably toward
a denouement. Linked to the cause-and-effect patterning of action
found in most science fiction, this diachronic movement is particularly vexing for cyberpunk. Based as it is on a radicalunderstanding
of the machine's impact on human experience, cyberpunk would
seem to need plots that are also machinelike, that move synchronically and repetitively, or that like computers loop endlessly. Instead,
Gibson falls back on plotting techniques that do nothing for his
fabricationof an altered reality and in fact run counter to it.
Equally disconcerting is Gibson's treatment of agency, especially
where his protagonists are concerned. Cyberpunk would have us
believe that the selves it posits are indeterminate and fragmented,
no longer unique, autonomous individuals, but this is not the case
for Gibson's protagonists. In seeming contradictionto the decentering of the subject that occurs with many of his minor characters,
Gibson'sprotagonists still fit the well-known mold of the free-willed,
self-aware,humanist subject. Significantly,his male "heroes"-Case,
Bobby, Slick Henry-are the characterswho are the least invaded by
technology. Without exception, they are all resolutely "human," not

This content downloaded from 147.8.31.43 on Thu, 28 Jan 2016 08:11:25 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

638

*

CONTEMPORARY

LITERATURE

least of all in their vulnerability. Refusing implants or alterations
that might call into question their humanness, they interact with
machines only temporarily when they jack into their decks and voluntarily enter cyberspace. Because these are the characters with
whom we as readers are encouraged to identify, we find our own
subjectivity reassuringly reaffirmed rather than threatened, as it
might be if these protagonists were technologically enhanced as are
so many of the minor characters, such as Molly, for example.
With Gibson's protagonists-the ones who are viewed sympathetically and with whom we are asked to identify-a unified self, a
thinking, feeling, autonomous being fully present to him- or herself
is the norm. Case, Bobby, Slick, Mona, Marly,Turner,and Angie all
are recognizably human and could function easily within the conventions of any realist narrative. Although Angie has been physiologically modified by technology-through the biosoft her father
implanted in her head when she was a child which allows her to
access cyberspace without using a computer deck-the others have
been unaltered by technology, and even Angie was an unwilling
recipient of at least part of her enhancement. Molly, the "razorgirl"
from Neuromancer,
is the chief exception among the main characters.
Perhaps because she more than any of the others has merged with
technology through her flashing knife-fingernail implants, her surgically jacked-up reflexes, and her mirrored-lens eye replacements,
she remains inscrutable to Case and therefore to us. At the end of
Neuromancer
she simply takes off, dissolving into the background of
the Sprawl, and Case never sees her again. With the other main
characters, however, agency and subjectivity are never problematized, and our identification with them is never posed in troubling
terms.
In fact, Gibson's rather reactionary preaching about the dangers
of the antihumanist stance and of decentered individuals, implied
by characterslike Molly,the Dixie Flatline, and Armitage, is brought
into sharp relief by the Tessier-Ashpools, the high-orbit clan whose
symbiotic relationship with their two AIs points to a deeply decentered form of human consciousness. But as Gibson portrays them,
the Tessier-Ashpools' attempt to reformulate their own subjectivity
becomes not only self-destructive but also evil. Revealingly, their
home, the Villa Straylight on Freeside, is described as a "parasitic

This content downloaded from 147.8.31.43 on Thu, 28 Jan 2016 08:11:25 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

SPONSLER

*

639

225, 229), where like a swarm of
structure," "a hive" (Neuromancer
insects the clan lives out an incestuous, selfish, hedonistic existence. As one of the Tessier-Ashpools says of her mother'svision for
the clan:
withtheAI's,ourcorporate
Sheimaginedus in a symbioticrelationship
decisions made for us. Our conscious decisions, I should say. TessierAshpool would be immortal, a hive, each of us units of a larger entity.... But ... with her death, her directionwas lost. All directionwas
lost, and we began to burrowinto ourselves.
(229)

The Tessier-Ashpools' decadence, incestuousness, extreme wealth,
and hermetic lives become a lesson in the dangers of tampering
with human identity.

Clearlythe difficulty Gibson faces is one of finding a way of treating
plot and agency so as to mesh with the implications of his postmodern aesthetic. While the surface world of his novels convincingly simulates or replicates the technological and cultural changes
whose impact he wishes to explore, the plots and protagonists do
not. Gibson tries to insert what we might think of as three-dimensional charactersand cause-and-effect actions onto a flat plane populated by free-floating, random, and decentered objects and people. This conflict between the scene and the agents who are made to
move meaningfully through it toward a resolution marks the impasse Gibson has reached. In his novels, first human agents, then
machines, and finally cyberspace itself are invested with a heroic
and romantic power that ultimately undermines the resolutely unromantic surface world he has set up. What Gibson has not been
able to do, making his novels after Neuromancer
increasingly unsatisfactory, is derive from his postmodern, two-dimensional scene
a similarly two-dimensional agency that can be manifested not
merely through realistic, cause-and-effect, diachronic action but
through something Gibson has not yet found. Gibson's predicament in the end is paradigmaticof the problem all cyberpunk faces:
it seems doomed to play out old plots peopled by old characters
within a scene that calls for a radically different formulation of hu-

This content downloaded from 147.8.31.43 on Thu, 28 Jan 2016 08:11:25 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

640

*

CONTEMPORARY

LITERATURE

man agency and action. Although the prevalence of cause-andeffect plots and autonomous, realistic characters in cyberpunk is
undoubtedly augmented by the demands of mass market publishing and the pull of genre conventions, it cannot be blamed entirely
on marketing terrain, since some SF writers-most notably Samuel
R. Delany and J. G. Ballard-have on occasion circumvented these
constraints.
Jameson would see cyberpunk's narrative dilemmas as endemic
to all science fiction, which in his view always serves to "dramatize
our incapacity to imagine the future," especially a future based in
otherness and radical difference. In search of the unknown, SF instead "findsitself irrevocablymired in the all-too-familiar,and thereby
becomes unexpectedly transformedinto a contemplationof our own
absolute limits" ("Progress"246). The failure of William Gibson to
narrate an antihumanist, nontranscendent future is not therefore
Gibson's failure, but our own, Jameson would argue. In fact, for
Jameson, the political function of a utopian genre like science fiction is to reveal "ourconstitutional inability to imagine utopia itself,
and this, not owing to any individual failure of imagination but as
the result of the systemic, cultural, and ideological closure of which
we are all in one way or another prisoners" ("Progress"247). Gibson simply mirrors our culture's collective failure of imagination.
Thus, in Jameson'sview, cyberpunk has come up against the imaginative limits all science fiction encounters.
This imaginative impasse has an ideological dimension as well. It
is certainly easy to criticize Gibson and cyberpunk in general on
ideological grounds, as critics such as Istvan Csicsery-Ronay and
Andrew Ross do, for refusing to propose a progressive politics even
though its dystopian future opens up considerable space for a resistance to the logic of late capitalism. As Ross says, Gibson's novels
"harbor no utopian impulses, offer no blueprint for progressive
social change, and generally evade the responsibility to imagine
futures that will be more democraticthan the present"(150).CsicseryRonay complains in a similar vein that "cyberpunk is ... the apotheosis of bad faith, apotheosis of the postmodern" (277) in large part
because it collapses "hallucinations and realia"with the result that
"thereis no place from which to reflect"on our culture'sdeficiencies
(274). Ross identifies cyberpunk's link with "hackermythology"-

This content downloaded from 147.8.31.43 on Thu, 28 Jan 2016 08:11:25 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

SPONSLER

*

641

which "forthe most part, has been almost exclusively white, masculine, and middle class" (84) and has romanticized computer hackers
as "apprentice architects" of a future "dominated by knowledge,
expertise, and 'smartness' " (90)-as one of the culprits of its ideological malaise. For Ross, cyberpunk is part of the "remasculinized
landscape of anarcho-libertarianyouth-culture" (146) of the eighties
that ran parallel with yuppie gentrification of urban zones in which
street culture provided exotic coloring and thrills for white suburbanites. In Ross's view, "Yuppie gentrification was the new pioneer
frontier of the 1980s, and cyberpunk was one of its privileged
genres, splicing the glamorous, adventurist culture of the high-tech
console cowboy with the atmospheric ethic of the alienated street
dick whose natural habitat was exclusively concrete and neon"
(147). In spite of the justice of Ross's critique, cyberpunk's trouble is
more than just an ideological failure grounded in social irresponsibility; its trouble is also a matter of narrative failure (which is of
course also an ideological issue). If one of the aims of cyberpunk is
to give narrative and symbolic coherence to our desires, fears, and
anxieties about technological trends, then it falls seriously short
at narrating new patterns of human action within this radically
changed landscape.
Peter Fitting, drawing on Jameson, argues that cyberpunk's problem is one of representation, specifically of representing our technoculture for ourselves. According to Fitting, "our inability to represent for ourselves the communicational and computer networks
that stretch out from our terminals and telephones and radios and
televisions is, by extension, a difficulty in grasping the 'whole world
system of present-day multinational capitalism' [Jameson]" (311).
But judging from Gibson's success at sketching a cyberpunk surface
world, the difficulty seems not to be one of representing or, to speak
in more properly postmodern terms, simulatingthe phenomena of
our technoculture, but ratherof understanding human action within
that culture. Constance Penley has remarked about The Terminator
that although this film acts as a kind of critical dystopia that examines causes as well as displays symptoms, like most recent SF it
"limits itself to solutions that are either individualist or bound to
a romanticized notion of guerilla-like small-group resistance. The
true atrophy of the utopian imagination is this: we can imagine the

This content downloaded from 147.8.31.43 on Thu, 28 Jan 2016 08:11:25 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

642

*

CONTEMPORARY

LITERATURE

future but we cannotconceive the kind of collective political strategies necessary to change or ensure that future" (64). Penley's criticism clearly applies to Gibson's novels as well: Gibson canimagine
the future, but he cannotimagine a future that does not simply play
out forces now dominant in our society, a flaw that is most glaring in
his inability to imagine a reformulated sense of human action that
escapes the essentially regressive realist/romanticparadigm. Bukatman has argued that cyberpunk's value lies in the way it reinserts
the human into the new territory shaped by technology and stages
"a confrontationbetween figure and ground, finally constructing a
new human form to interface with the other space and cybernetic
reality" ("Cybernetic" 48). Similarly, Hollinger sees cyberpunk's
redeeming power in its exploration of a new kind of subjectivity, of
"the ways in which we and our technologies 'interface' to produce
what has become a mutualevolution" (42). But in its failure to reformulate human action and fictional narration as part of this process
of interfacing, cyberpunk undermines its radicalpotential.
In the 1930s, as Ross points out, science fiction saw itself as an
innovative genre that deliberately considered "new, cutting-edge,
even prophetic forms of knowledge and social action in the present
and in the future";hence it "had a claim on modernity that other generic popular fiction was not in a position to share or to match"
(126). The same is true for cyberpunk's aesthetics of techno-progress and its claim on postmodernity. For this reason, cyberpunk's
narrativefailures-at the level of plot and agency-illustrate aesthetic
and ideological dilemmas experienced by all postmodern fiction.
What, then, does this impasse, this contradiction between surface and depth, postmodernism and realism/romanticism, tell us
about the challenges faced by other contemporary narratives besides science fiction? In part, cyberpunk's inconsistencies describe
the difficulty of evading the pull of a continued desire for the transcendental signified, for the sense of human and cosmic purposefulness, for the meaningfulness that cause-and-effectplots and realistic charactersso reliablyconvey.In largerpart, however,cyberpunk's
difficulties describe the problematics of postmodern representation, particularlyin terms of narratives. According to the postmodern understanding of language and reality, such things as imagery,
metaphors, and symbols surface out of the babel of discourse, pre-

This content downloaded from 147.8.31.43 on Thu, 28 Jan 2016 08:11:25 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

SPONSLER

*

643

senting difficulties for any attempt at putting them together in ways
that communicate without falling back into realist or romantic paradigms. Postmodernism has in fact so thoroughly problematized the
relation between objects, events, language, and meaning that narration-and especially the form of narration we call the novel-has
become nearly impossible. Simulation may have replaced representation in the postmodern aesthetic, but simulation proves particularly thorny for narrative. Gibson's failure may in fact be not just
endemic to science fiction but symptomatic of all postmodern novels. As such, it points up some of the obstacles faced by all contemporary fiction writers who set themselves the task of a narrative
exploration of our cultural moment.
GeorgeWashingtonUniversity

W ORKS

CITED

Baudrillard, Jean. "The Ecstasy of Communication." Trans. John Johnston. The

Anti-Aesthetic:Essayson PostmodernCulture.Ed. Hal Foster.Port Townsend, WA: Bay, 1983. 126-34.
Bergstrom, Janet. 'Androids and Androgyny." CloseEncounters:Film, Feminism,
and Science Fiction. Ed. Constance Penley et al. Minneapolis: U of Minnesota P, 1991. 33-60.
Bukatman, Scott. "The Cybernetic (City) State: Terminal Space Becomes Phenomenal." Journalof the Fantasticin the Arts 2 (1989): 43-63.
"Postcards from the Posthuman Solar System." Science-FictionStudies
-,.
18 (1991): 343-57.
Csicsery-Ronay, Istvan. "Cyberpunk and Neuromanticism." Mississippi Review
47-48 (1988): 266-78.
Fitting, Peter. "The Lessons of Cyberpunk." Technoculture.Ed. Constance Penley and Andrew Ross. Cultural Politics 3. Minneapolis: U of Minnesota P,
1991. 295-315.
Gibson, William. Count Zero. 1986. New York:Ace, 1987.
Mona Lisa Overdrive.New York:Bantam, 1988.
--.
Neuromancer.New York:Ace, 1984.
-~.
Grant, Glenn. "Transcendence through Detournement in William Gibson's

" Science-Fiction
Studies17 (1990):41-49.
Neuromancer.

Haraway, Donna. '"AManifesto for Cyborgs: Science, Technology, and Socialist
Feminism in the 1980s." SocialistReview80 (1985): 65-107. Rpt. in Comingto
Terms:Feminism, Theory, Politics. Ed. Elizabeth Weed. New York: Routledge, 1989. 173-204.

This content downloaded from 147.8.31.43 on Thu, 28 Jan 2016 08:11:25 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

644

*

CONTEMPORARY

LITERATURE

Hollinger, Veronica. "Cybernetic Deconstructions: Cyberpunk and Postmodernism." Mosaic 23. 2 (1990): 29-44.
Jameson, Fredric. "Postmodernism and Consumer Society." TheAnti-Aesthetic:
Essays on PostmodernCulture. Ed. Hal Foster. Port Townsend, WA: Bay,
1983. 111-25.
. "Progress versus Utopia; or, Can We Imagine the Future?" Science•- FictionStudies9
in Art
Modernism:
147-58.

(1982):

Rpt.

after

Rethinking

Representation.Ed. Brian Wallis. Documentary Sources in Contemporary
Art. New York: New Museum of Contemporary Art; Boston: Godine,
1984. 239-52.
Kuhn, Annette. Introduction to "PartV: Intertexts." Alien Zone: CulturalTheory

ScienceFictionCinema.Ed. Annette Kuhn. London:
and Contemporary
Verso, 1990. 177-82.
Luckhurst, Roger. "Border Policing: Postmodernism and Science Fiction." Science-FictionStudies 18 (1991): 358-66.
Penley, Constance. "Time Travel, Primal Scene, and the Critical Dystopia."

CloseEncounters:
Film,Feminism,andScienceFiction.Ed. ConstancePenley
et al. Minneapolis: U of Minnesota P, 1991. 63-80.

in the Age of
Ross, Andrew. StrangeWeather:Culture,Science,and Technology
Limits. London: Verso, 1991.
Sterling, Bruce, ed. Mirrorshades:The CyberpunkAnthology. 1986. New York:
Ace, 1988.

Suvin, Darko. Metamorphoses
of ScienceFiction:On the PoeticsandHistoryof a
LiteraryGenre. New Haven: Yale UP, 1979.
Tomas, David. "Old Rituals for New Space: Rites de Passageand William Gibson's Cultural Model of Cyberspace." Cyberspace:First Steps. Ed. Michael
Benedikt. Cambridge: MIT P, 1991. 31-47.

Warrick,PatriciaS. The CyberneticImaginationin ScienceFiction.Cambridge:
MIT P, 1980.

This content downloaded from 147.8.31.43 on Thu, 28 Jan 2016 08:11:25 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

