arts
Editorial

The Future of Cyberpunk Criticism: Introduction to
Transpacific Cyberpunk
Takayuki Tatsumi
Department of English, Keio University, Tokyo 108-8345, Japan; CXQ04644@nifty.com
Received: 19 March 2019; Accepted: 21 March 2019; Published: 25 March 2019




The genesis of cyberpunk criticism could well be dated to March 1987, when Stephen P. Brown
inaugurated the first cyberpunk journal Science Fiction Eye together with his friend Daniel J. Steffan,
with Paul DiFilippo, Elizabeth Hand, and myself as contributing editors. Of course, it is the impact
of William Gibson’s multiple-award-winning Neuromancer in 1984, featuring the anti-hero Case’s
adventures in what Gibson himself called “cyberspace,” that aroused popular interest in the new style
of speculative fiction. This surge of interest led Gibson’s friend, writer Bruce Sterling, the editor of the
legendary critical fanzine Cheap Truth, to serve as unofficial chairman of the brand-new movement.
Thus, on 31 August 1985, the first cyberpunk panel took place at NASFiC (The North American Science
Fiction Convention) in Austin, Texas, featuring writers in Sterling’s circle: John Shirley, Lewis Shiner,
Pat Cadigan, Greg Bear, and Rudy Rucker. As I was studying American literature at the graduate
school of Cornell University during the mid-1980s, I was fortunate enough to witness this historical
moment. After the panel, Sterling said, “Our time has come!” Thus, from the spring of 1986, I decided
to conduct a series of interviews with cyberpunk writers, part of which are now easily available in
Patrick A. Smith’s edited Conversations with William Gibson (University Press of Mississippi 2014).
However, without Brown’s plan in 1987 of publishing the new journal Science Fiction Eye focusing
on cyberpunk criticism, my early interviews and articles could not have been published in their
original form. It was in May 1986 at Disclave’86, the annual local science fiction convention held in the
Washington D.C. area, that I could have my first interview with Gibson and come to know his close
friend Steve Brown, who wanted me to get involved in his new project. Since then, Brown taught me
everything he could about science fiction journalism. What is more, he provided me with whatever
he found intriguing and necessary in this field. He sent me a copy of Jeanne Gomoll’s monumental
symposium on “Women in Science Fiction”, featured in a fanzine called Khatru #3 and #4. It is true
that the cyberpunk writer community is sometimes called another boys’ club, with the exceptions of
Pat Cadigan and Ellen Datlow, the legendary editor of the OMNI magazine who was nicknamed “the
queen of cyberpunk.” Nevertheless, Brown’s editorship also opened up a heated discussion among
feminist speculative fiction writers and critics such as Connie Willis, Pat Murphy, Karen Joy Fowler,
Lucy Sussex, and Mari Kotani. Thus, the cyberpunk movement very naturally initiated me into the
rise of cyborg feminism, as presaged by the proto-feminist and proto-cyberpunk writer James Tiptree,
Jr in the 1970s, and firmly established by distinguished historian of science Donna Haraway of the
University of California, Santa Cruz in the 1980s. At that point, I did not anticipate that Haraway’s
astonishing article “The Cyborg Manifesto” (1985) was to be admired in the 1990s as part of the canon
of Cultural Studies. This article was first translated into Japanese by Mari Kotani and included in
my edited book Cyborg Feminism (Treville 1991), along with the major African American speculative
fictionist Samuel Delany’s critique of Haraway, together with feminist heroic fantasy writer Jessica
Amanda Salmonson’s essay on Anne McCaffery’s The Ship Who Sang (1969).
Thus, cyberpunk refreshed not only the science fiction criticism that had been cultivated by
Anglo-American academic journals such as Extrapolation, Foundation, and Science Fiction Studies, but also
critical theory as such in the wake of Franco-American structuralism, semiotics, and deconstruction,
Arts 2019, 8, 40; doi:10.3390/arts8010040

www.mdpi.com/journal/arts

Arts 2019, 8, 40

2 of 3

championed by Roland Barthes, Tzvetan Todorov, Michel Foucault, Paul de Man, and others. This is the
reason why my friend Larry McCaffery of San Diego State University, the guru of Avant-Pop, included
in his splendidly edited Storming the Reality Studio: A Casebook of Cyberpunk and Postmodern Science
Fiction (Duke University Press 1991) not only hardcore cyberpunks but also postmodern theoreticians
such as Jacques Derrida, Fredric Jameson, Jean Baudrillard, Arthur Kroker, Darko Suvin, and others.
This casebook well deserves the name of the first academic collection of cyberpunk criticism that paved
the way for critical theory to come in the age of the digital humanities.
In retrospect, since its inception in the early 1980s, which coincided with the dawn of the internet
and the rise of computer hackers, the cyberpunk movement has had a tremendous impact on today’s
globalist literature and culture, ranging from manga and anime through to cinema. Bruce Sterling
did not conceal his fascination with Japanese pop, such as the synthpop of Sandii and Sunsets. It is
well known that William Gibson’s 1980s Cyberspace Trilogy (Neuromancer [1984], Count Zero [1986],
and Mona Lisa Overdrive [1988]), which explored the frontier of cyberspace, another name for the
internet coined by the very author, was influenced not only by the punk rock of Lou Reed but also
by the techno-pop of Yellow Magic Orchestra. Gibson’s 1990s Bridge Trilogy (Virtual Light [1993],
Idoru [1996], and All Tomorrow’s Parties [1999]) featured a virtual idol, Rei Toei, who coincided with her
real-life Japanese counterpart Kyoko Date, a 3D CG virtual girl developed by Hori Productions and
without whom no AI Beauty, such as Hatsune Miku, could have been created in the heyday of Cool
Japan here in the 21st century. While 1960s North American writers owed much to the counterculture
developed on the West Coast, 1980s cyberpunks are more deeply indebted to transpacific negotiations.
By the same token, however, we should not neglect their extraterritorial status. While Bruce
Sterling incorporated his childhood experience in India into his fiction and started to go back and forth
between Texas and Europe since the 2000s, Gibson migrated in the mid-1970s from South Carolina to
Toronto, Canada to evade the draft. Being a typical expatriate, Gibson put special emphasis upon the
Lo-Tek (outlaw technologist) spirit of a post-countercultural tribe, which was to be shared by the punk
kids Otomo describes in Akira and the human weapons that director Shinya Tsukamoto represents in
his TETSUO trilogy (1989–2010). Tsukamoto, in turn, is one of the major inheritors of the “Japanese
Apache” aesthetic created by Komatsu Sakyo, a Founding Father of Japanese science fiction in his
first novel Nippon Apacchi-zoku (The Japanese Apache [1964]), as I detailed in Full Metal Apache (Duke
UP 2006). A further descendant of cyberpunk could be found in Neil Blomkamp’s South African
post-cyberpunk film District 9 (2009), in which the natives of Johannesburg and the miserable aliens
lost in space turn out to have the Lo-Tek spirit in common.
Indeed, cyberpunk is not only a literary and (sub-)cultural subgenre optimistically celebrating the
growth of high-technology, but it also embodies the neo-extraterritorial spirit of Lo-Tek tribes born out
of the postmodern street. What matters now is that in this context, cyberpunk started gaining new
significance not only in contemporary arts of representation but also in international/transnational
critical theory.
As the guest editor of the special issue of Arts journal featuring “Cyberpunk in a Transnational
Context,” I feel very pleased to be able to present here a number of illuminating essays written by
international authors who share my own interest in the future of critical theory.
Mike Mosher’s (2018) “Some Aspects of Californian Cyberpunk” vividly reminds us of the
influence of West Coast counterculture on cyberpunks, with special emphasis on 1960s theoretical
gurus such as Timothy Leary and Marshall McLuhan, who explored the frontiers of inner space as
well as the global village. Frenchy Lunning’s (2018) “Cyberpunk Redux: Dérives in the Rich Sight of
Post-Anthropocentric Visuality” examines how the heritage of Ridley Scott’s techno-noir film Blade
Runner (1982) that preceded Gibson’s Neuromancer (1984) keeps revolutionizing the art of visuality,
even in the age of the Anthropocene. If you read Lunning’s essay along with Lidia Meras’s (2018)
“European Cyberpunk Cinema,” which closely analyzes major European cyberpunkish dystopian films
Renaissance (2006) and Metropia (2009) and Elana Gomel’s (2018) “Recycled Distopias: Cyberpunk and
the End of History,” your understanding of the cinematic and post-utopian possibility of cyberpunk

Arts 2019, 8, 40

3 of 3

will become more comprehensive. For a cutting-edge critique of cyberpunk manga, let me recommend
Martin de la Iglesia’s (2018) “Has Akira Always Been a Cyberpunk Comic?” which radically redefines
the status of Akira (1982–1993) as trans-generic, paying attention to the genre consciousness of the
contemporary readers of its Euro-American editions. Next, Denis Taillandier’s (2018) “New Spaces
for Old Motifs? The Virtual Worlds of Japanese Cyberpunk” interprets the significance of Japanese
hardcore cyberpunk novels such as Goro Masaki’s Venus City (1995) and Hirotaka Tobi’s Grandes
Vacances (2002; translated as The Thousand Year Beach, 2018) and Ragged Girl (2006), paying special
attention to how the authors created their virtual landscape in a Japanese way. For a full discussion
of William Gibson’s works, please read Janine Tobek and Donald Jellerson’s (2018) “Caring About
the Past, Present, and Future in William Gibson’s Pattern Recognition and Guerilla Games’ Horizon:
Zero Dawn” along with my own “Transpacific Cyberpunk: Transgeneric Interactions between Prose,
Cinema, and Manga” (Tatsumi 2018). The former reconsiders the first novel of Gibson’s new trilogy
in the 21st century not as realistic but as participatory, and redefines its aesthetics with today’s video
game culture by renovating Walter Benjamin’s philosophy. The latter relocates Gibson’s essence not in
cyberspace but in a junkyard, making the most of his post-Dada/Surrealistic aesthetics and “Lo-Tek”
way of life, as is clear in the 1990s “Bridge” trilogy.
To sum up, this collection, which itself transgresses the boundaries between the literary and the
visual, will undoubtedly provide you with the most concise introduction to cyberpunk criticism in the
21st century.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Conflicts of Interest: The author declares no conflict of interest.

References
De la Iglesia, Martin. 2018. Has Akira Always Been a Cyberpunk Comic? Arts 7: 32. [CrossRef]
Gomel, Elana. 2018. Recycled Dystopias: Cyberpunk and the End of History. Arts 7: 31. [CrossRef]
Lunning, Frenchy. 2018. Cyberpunk Redux: Dérives in the Rich Sight of Post-Anthropocentric Visuality. Arts 7: 38.
[CrossRef]
Merás, Lidia. 2018. European Cyberpunk Cinema. Arts 7: 45. [CrossRef]
Mosher, Mike. 2018. Some Aspects of California Cyberpunk. Arts 7: 54. [CrossRef]
Taillandier, Denis. 2018. New Spaces for Old Motifs? The Virtual Worlds of Japanese Cyberpunk. Arts 7: 60.
[CrossRef]
Tatsumi, Takayuki. 2018. Transpacific Cyberpunk: Transgeneric Interactions between Prose, Cinema, and Manga.
Arts 7: 9. [CrossRef]
Tobeck, Janine, and Donald Jellerson. 2018. Caring about the Past, Present, and Future in William Gibson’s Pattern
Recognition and Guerrilla Games’ Horizon: Zero Dawn. Arts 7: 53. [CrossRef]
© 2019 by the author. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

