Introduction
The Simulation Hypothesis
We are living in a computer-programmed reality, and
the only clue we have to it is when some variable is
changed, and some alteration in our reality occurs.
—Philip K. Dick, Metz Sci-Fi Convention, 1977
As a kid growing up in the Midwest in the early 1980s, I loved
video games. You could say I grew up with them. My friends and I
would go to D&B Pizza to watch the older kids (who had more
quarters than we did) playing the arcade games there. These games,
now classics, included Space Invaders, Donkey Kong, Pac-Man, and
even Dragon’s Lair, which confounded and delighted us because we
couldn’t decide if it was an animated cartoon or a video game!
When my family finally got an Atari video game console (or VCS)
at home, my friends often came over to my house to play the latest
cartridge-based games. During this time, as I watched my friends
play, I became intrigued not just by the gameplay itself but by the
“illusion” that there was a self-contained world “in there,” inside the
video game that was being displayed on our TV set. I don’t know
exactly where or when this notion of a self-contained world first
emerged in my mind, but it happened particularly in games that were
trying to be realistic.
When playing a racing game, for example, while the car was going
around the track, my eyes would be drawn to members of the virtual
audience sitting in the bleachers. Beyond the bleachers, there was a
sky with clouds and a city or country landscape that was only partly
visible. I found myself wondering how far this “simulated world”
extended in all directions beyond the track. What happened when no
one was playing the video game? Did the characters and the
buildings still exist, or did they simply cease to exist?
Although I learned to program rudimentary video games myself
shortly thereafter when my parents bought my brother and I a
Commodore 64 (and later, an Apple II), it would be many years
before I understood video game development well enough to answer
these types of questions.
The first game I ever created was Tic Tac Toe, basically putting
blocky lines on the screen and then figuring out how to get the
computer to “draw” Xs and Os on the squares selected by the players.
My brother and I would play each other, but after he got bored I
figured I could play against the computer. I began conceiving
subroutines that could determine where to place the best move on
the screen at any given point.
Years later in the 1990s while I was a computer science student at
MIT, I would learn all about AI and game playing algorithms, which
allowed the computer to play more competitively. At the same time, I
watched as video game fidelity improved, moving from 8-bit to 16-bit
games, and the world “in there” started to look more and more
realistic.
More than a decade after that, I moved to Silicon Valley at the
start of the mobile gaming revolution. I designed a number of
different games, including Tap Fish—one of the most popular games
of its type (a resource management game, also called a simulation
game), having reached more than 30 million downloads in the early
days of the Apple iPhone. Later, I designed multiplayer competitive
games based on popular TV shows like Penny Dreadful and Grimm
and became an advisor to and investor in many video game
companies.
During these years, games evolved from simple adventure and
arcade games to fully 3D massively multiplayer online role-playing
games (MMORPGs), such as Ultima Online and World of Warcraft.
Some games were actually virtual worlds, such as Second Life and
The Sims, in which the goal was more about “simulating” life and less
about fighting monsters.
These developments only amplified the questions that had been
lurking at the back of my mind since I first started playing with the
Atari:
What happened when no one was playing the game? Were the
simulated characters still there? Did the landscape change and
evolve? If multiple users were playing the same game online, did it
mean they were part of a shared world that existed independent of
their computers? If so, where was it—was it on a server, or was it in
some other metaphysical landscape in “cyberspace”? Or did the
world only exist when it was rendered on someone’s local computer?
Do We All Live Inside a Video Game?
Over the last decade, these basic questions about video game
worlds have formed the basis of a much larger debate that has been
raging among scientists, tech entrepreneurs, computer
programmers, philosophers, and science-fiction writers, not to
mention among the general public. This debate is not just about
video game technology, but about the nature of our reality and how
the world “out here” might actually be more like the world “in there”
than we previously thought.
The idea that what we call reality is actually a super-sophisticated
video game is popularly referred to as the Simulation Hypothesis.
The fundamental question raised by the simulation hypothesis is
this: Are we all actually characters living inside some kind of giant,
massively multiplayer online video game, a simulated reality that is
so well rendered that we cannot distinguish it from “physical
reality”?
Although Oxford philosopher Nick Bostrom coined the term the
Simulation Argument in a landmark paper in 2003, the idea of living
in a simulated reality has been around for a long time in science,
religion and fiction.
The reality of the world around us is something that philosophers
have debated for some time. Thousands of years ago in The Republic,
Plato described his analogy of the cave. In this cave, the residents are
chained to a wall so they can’t see the world outside; the best they
can perceive are shadows of the real world, reflected on the wall of
the cave by some light outside. The residents of the cave construct an
elaborate idea about what reality is, and Plato surmised that we are
like the residents of this cave, seeing only shadows of the real world.
Many of the world’s religious traditions tell us that the world
around us is an illusion created for our benefit. This is particularly
true in the Eastern traditions of Buddhism and Hinduism, which
explicitly tell us that the world we see is maya, or illusion, and that
there is another world out there beyond the illusion. Even the
Western religions have a similar concept of this world (the “here”)
and the other, eternal world (the “hereafter”).
Psychiatrists like Carl Jung have probed the question of mental
projection, where each of us is perceiving the world slightly
differently based upon what is going on inside our minds. In this
view, most of what we think of as being “out there”—the physical
world—is actually “in here,” meaning in our heads, like a dream,
there being no objective physical reality.
More recently, Elon Musk, world-famous entrepreneur and
founder of Tesla Motors and SpaceX, has put forth this idea as being
very likely. In fact, he estimates the chances that we are in a
simulation at a billion to one. His remarks have ignited serious
debate.
There are good reasons for Musk to put forth this argument at
this point in time. A few years ago, I started the Play Labs accelerator
at MIT for startups using the latest video game technology. There, I
saw firsthand the high fidelity that today’s virtual and augmented
reality can achieve.
If this pace of improvement of video games continues into the
future, what kinds of sophisticated video games will we be able to
produce? Will we eventually be able to produce a game with such
high resolution that it will be indistinguishable from reality? And if
so, could we already be inside such a video game?
This realization led me to explore the simulation hypothesis in
detail. What I discovered is that its implications go well beyond the
fields of computer science and video games to strike at the heart of
all of our various paths of searching for truth.
The goal of what we call science is to understand the nature of
reality. If we are in fact inside a video game, then science becomes a
matter of “discovering” the rules of this video game. I found that
many renowned physicists believe a computer-generated simulated
world would explain some of the strangest findings of quantum
physics.
It turns out that, before science, this search for truth was the
domain of religions and philosophers. The more I delved into their
cosmological models of how the universe works, particularly the
Eastern mystics, the more clearly I saw how the simulation
hypothesis explains the ancient teachings in a scientific way.
Science Fiction—How the Simulation Hypothesis Went Mainstream
Let’s back up a little bit. It wasn’t just playing and creating video
games but watching and reading (what my parents might say was too
much) science fiction that put me on this path of speculation about
the simulation hypothesis.
The first time I personally considered the idea that we were all
living in a simulated reality was during an episode of Star Trek: The
Next Generation, when a holodeck character realized that he was in a
simulation and that some of the people in the simulation existed “out
there.” The holodeck was a super sophisticated room that could
simulate any environment, and it allowed the crew of the Enterprise
to experience any real or fictional environment. In this episode, the
crew were simulating a Sherlock Holmes mystery, and the character
who realized that he was in a simulation was Professor Moriarty,
based on Holmes’s most famous nemesis.
In this case, “out there” meant outside the holodeck, which was
the rest of the spaceship Enterprise! I wondered: Is it possible that
we are in a holodeck-like space and there is another world “out
there”?
It was not a coincidence that my first encounter with the
simulation hypothesis was through a TV show. The concept of the
simulation hypothesis is so tied into the science fiction of our recent
past that it would be difficult to talk about it coherently without
making science fiction references. In fact, the idea that we are living
in a simulated reality first entered Western popular consciousness
through science fiction.
No other piece of science fiction was more influential in bringing
the simulation hypothesis into the popular consciousness than the
movie The Matrix, released in 1999. In the film, Keanu Reeves plays
a character (Mr. Anderson) who lives in a world that seems a lot like
ours, but at night he’s a hacker (called Neo) who explores different
places on the net, only to find enigmatic references to something
called “the Matrix.” He stumbles onto a team of hackers who turn his
worldview upside down.
In a now famous scene, Neo is given the choice of taking the “red
pill” or the “blue pill” by a character called Morpheus (named after
the Greek god of dreams and sleep, played by Laurence Fishburne).
The red pill will wake Neo up, while the blue pill will allow him to
continue living his existence in the dream world that is the Matrix.
By taking the red pill, Neo wakes up to realize that what he
thought was reality was actually a computer simulation. He finds
that in the real world, all humans live in pods, plugged into the
Matrix—a high-fidelity video game–like simulation that the
characters have lived in their whole lives. In the sequels to The
Matrix, the audience learns that this simulated reality was created to
keep human minds preoccupied by a race of super-intelligent
machines, who were using the small amount of electricity generated
by each human’s brain for their own nefarious purposes.
While The Matrix is probably the most popular fictional
rendering of the simulation hypothesis, its creators, the Wachowskis,
were far from the first science fiction writers to suggest this idea. The
Wachowskis claimed to be inspired by noted sci-fi author Philip K.
Dick, whose novels of alternate realities have become remarkably
popular in the years since his death.
While writing this book, I spoke with Dick’s wife (he passed away
in 1982), Leslie “Tessa” B. Dick, and she pointed out that this was a
recurring theme across many of his novels, only some of which have
been made into movies. The question of what is real and what is fake
— whether about our physical reality or about our humanity—were
central in many of Dick’s highly imaginative works.
In Dick’s short story The Adjustment Team (which the 2011 film
The Adjustment Bureau is based upon), the main character, Ed
Fletcher, is late for work one day and finds that his whole building,
including the people within it, is being “adjusted.” During
adjustment, everything is de-energized, a process which freezes
everyone in place while changes are being made to the building and
to the people by “the adjustment team.” It’s kind of like hitting the
pause button on a movie or a video game and freezing the scene.
The people who are adjusted, including Fletcher’s co-workers and
boss, only have the new memories once the adjustment is done.
Fletcher, on the other hand, remembers the “pre-adjusted” world; he
was not supposed to have caught a peek behind the curtain of reality,
since he should have been in the office already and should have been
adjusted along with everyone else.
These notions of pulling the curtain back on reality, fake
memories, and different timelines were hallmarks of Philip K. Dick’s
work. In The Man in the High Castle, a novel that won Dick the
prestigious Hugo Award and is the basis of the Amazon TV series, we
see an alternate timeline in which the Axis powers, Germany and
Japan, won World War II. They now rule the United States, having
divided it between them. Only by perceiving “another reality” is one
of the main characters able to see an “alternate world” where the
Allies won the war—which is our current world!
Sometimes Dick’s stories dealt with artificial intelligence and fake
memories more directly, both of which play a significant role in the
simulation hypothesis. Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?,
which inspired the classic movie Blade Runner (starring Harrison
Ford and directed by Ridley Scott), brings up the idea of false
memories implanted in artificially created robots who look and act
human. In fact, these androids may not even know they are artificial
beings. This work raises serious questions about what it means to be
human versus simulated or artificial consciousness, a topic we will
explore in this book.
Tessa went much further than the novels, saying that Dick
actually had experiences in life that convinced him that we were all
inside some kind of simulation. Dick claimed that there were entities
or people who could change the variables of the simulation, thus
altering our timeline. Like some of his characters, Dick claimed to
have remembered some of the original timeline before it was
adjusted! This theme would be familiar to his readers. Dick
expressed his view in a now-famous speech at a science fiction
convention in Metz, France, in 1977. Dick said that we were inside a
computer-generated reality that could be “paused” or “backed up” to
change the variables, and then rerun forward. These “changed
variables” were the only way, according to Dick, that we could realize
we were in such a simulation!
Quantum Physics and the Idea of a “Subjective Reality”
Today, given the pace of technological progress in video games
and computers since Dick’s time, science fiction writers are not alone
in believing that we are all living in a simulation. Many prominent
scholars and renowned physicists are voicing their beliefs that we
live in a sophisticated simulation. The celebrated physicist and
author of A Brief History of Time, Stephen Hawking, speculated that
we have a 50 percent chance of being in a simulated reality. He’s not
the only well-known physicist to think so. Host of the new Cosmos,
Neil deGrasse Tyson, has said that he thinks it’s very likely that the
universe is a simulation. The assertions of such well-known scientists
are notable and led me to explore what quantum physics might
reveal about the simulation hypothesis.
What I learned as I delved into these areas is that quantum
physics provides significant clues that we are in some kind of
simulated reality. The basis for quantum physics is that the universe
is not continuous but exists as a set of “quanta,” or discrete, values.
This is true for subatomic particles, such as electrons, that seem to
jump from one state to another without going through the values in
between, a phenomenon known as a quantum leap. This is also true
for computer simulations, which are based on discrete particles
called pixels.
One of the most famous and troubling aspects of quantum
physics is that we may not be living in a physical universe after all,
but in a universe of probabilities. The idea is that a subatomic
particle exists as a wave of probabilities—what’s called the quantum
probability wave—until the probability wave collapses into a single
reality. You might compare it to a theater that has a number of seats
in it, and the “wave” is the probability that you (the particle) might
be sitting in any one of these seats.
The best explanation that quantum physicists have been able to
give for how the probability wave collapses is that consciousness,
through the act of observation, plays a central role. In fact, some, like
Fred Alan Wolf, a theoretical physicist, believe consciousness plays
the critical role in the collapse of the probability wave: it is the act of
observation that behaves much like a cosmic usher, ushering you to a
specific seat in the theater.
This is startling. Generally speaking, since the time of French
philosopher, mathematician and scientist René Descartes, science
has subscribed to a materialistic worldview, where physical reality
and consciousness are wholly separate and don’t interact with one
another. The idea of a separate observer and observed universe
doesn’t exist in quantum physics. Not only does quantum physics
disrupt the whole idea of subject-object separation, but it opens a
door that many physicists are uncomfortable with: we may not be
living in an “objective” reality after all! In fact, our consciousness is
so interconnected with reality that we may be living in a set of
interconnected subjective realities.
This phenomenon, referred to as quantum indeterminacy, is one
of the biggest mysteries in physics (and all of science), and it raises
some serious questions about the nature of reality.
Some of these questions are strikingly similar to the ones that I
have been asking about video games my whole life: Do all these
probable realities actually exist, or are they just probabilities? Is
there an actual shared reality, or is it rendered on separate
observation devices? Is there in fact an objective world when no one
is watching, or does it come in to existence only when someone is
watching it – i.e., only when someone is “logged in”?
And of course, the biggest question of all: Why would we be in a
probabilistic world where making a choice (or having an
observation) collapses a probability wave to a single timeline or
probability?
As I began to explore this last question in some depth, it brought
back my early experiences with Tic Tac Toe and with more
sophisticated video game algorithms. As video game designers, we
have to map out the possible “futures”—paths that might be taken
inside the game. Most simple AI in games simulates moves of
“possible futures” and then picks the “best possible move” based on
those possible futures.
These possible futures are similar to the idea of a probability
wave. In fact, the whole field of probability was originally created for
gaming. Rather than referring to potential outcomes as probabilities,
they were first called “possible futures” in rolling dice. A single die
might have one of six possible futures, each one equally likely
(assuming a uniform die). Two dice might have 6 x 6 = 36 possible
futures. Thus was born statistics—presenting a way to talk about
possible futures in games.
In quantum physics, this collapse of a probability wave into a
single future seems to happen based on conscious observation or
measurement. In a video game, the path that any player follows
depends on the conscious choice and subsequent rendering of that
choice on the player’s own computer (which can be thought of as his
or her “machine of consciousness”).
The computer renders only the part of the world that is relevant
to that single player, based on their choices when they are logged in
to the virtual world. There is no “shared rendering,” since the
rendering is done on each player’s individual computer, which brings
up the idea that each of us might be experiencing a slightly different
version of reality, based upon our observations of the world around
us.
Even relativity, which Einstein described independently of his
work on quantum physics, tells us that there is no simultaneity
between events that are happening at different places. This reminds
me of a network of computers connected by light speed
(electromagnetic pulses), where players are making moves in their
own “inertial frame,” and the computer is doing its best to give the
“illusion” of both simultaneity and order.
Many of the findings of relativity and quantum physics make no
sense in the materialist worldview—that we are living in an
immutable physical universe.
When I was at MIT, we were taught that most of science is
coming up with models for how the world works, and if a better
model is found, it will explain aspects of the world that seemed
unexplainable in previous models. For example, Newton’s classical
physics explained the world better than what came before; then
Einstein came up with his theory of relativity, and it explained light
and travel at high speeds much better than Newton’s model, so it was
adopted. Similarly, with quantum physics, its model of the
microscopic world of probabilities explained the observed results
much better than Bohr’s previous model of the atom, which was the
“planetary model” (i.e., electrons revolve around the nucleus like
planets revolve around the sun). While all of these ideas were looked
at suspiciously by the scientific establishment initially, they all came
to be adopted by modern science because they were better models.
It turns out that the simulation hypothesis and the model of the
world it is describing, of a sophisticated multiplayer video game with
characters operating within a rendered world, answers two big
questions about the physical world that physicists are afraid to ask:
Why does it work this way, and how does it work, exactly?
Eastern Mysticism and the Western Afterlife
At the same time that I was exploring the connections between
quantum physics and simulated reality during my adventures as an
entrepreneur and technologist, I had also started to travel a parallel
path exploring different states of consciousness.
It began as a simple search for techniques like meditation that
would help me become a more focused programmer and a more
successful startup founder. Eventually, it led me to explore the
ancient Eastern traditions, particularly the Yogic traditions and
Buddhist philosophy, and convinced me there was more going in our
physical world than science gave credit to. I wrote about some of
these experiences in my first book, Zen Entrepreneurship.
As I continued to study the ancient Buddhist and Hindu texts and
philosophies, I found they were much more in alignment with the
simulation hypothesis than a materialistic worldview. The Eastern
traditions are built on the idea that the world around us is not “the
real world.” In fact, they believe it is a world created by our minds as
we make choices in the world. We are so engrossed in this world, like
players addicted to a video game, that we get lost in this world of
maya, this world of illusion.
Karma, which most of us in the West think of as a cosmic game of
“what goes around, comes around”, is actually more subtle and more
rule-based than it appears. In fact, karma can be modeled as a list of
tasks and outcomes that we have to fulfill. Whenever we create
karma, a new “task” gets created on a virtual manifest, stored
somewhere outside the material world. When we incarnate in the
future, we can choose which particular tasks of our past karma we
should tackle in our new life. Buddha’s endless “Wheel of Life” tells
of the purpose of reincarnation: The reason we keep incarnating in
future lives is to fulfill the “missions” created in our present and past
lives.
To a video game designer like myself, the twin concepts of karma
and reincarnation sound a lot like video games in which a player has
multiple lives and an on-going list of “quests” and “achievements.”
The accomplishment of one task (or quest) unlocks new quests that
get added to the list. This is a lot like the process of creating new
karma described in Buddhism. As I thought about it, I realized that
the architecture of a sophisticated video game played out over many
lives mirrors the idea of Buddha’s endless wheel of reincarnation.
Furthermore, many Buddhist techniques for achieving
enlightenment are all about learning to recognize the illusion of the
world around us. One Tibetan technique is called “Dream Yoga,” in
which practitioners are trained to recognize the world around us is
like a dream. They learn this in a similar manner to the more modern
techniques of lucid dreaming, which train adherents to recognize
during a sleeping dream that we are “only dreaming” and the images
we see are not real. During dreams, which seem real, our bodies are
in bed asleep. The purpose of dream yoga is to ask if there is another
part of us, outside of the illusion of the physical world, outside the
collective dream.
The metaphor of the world being a dream is intertwined with the
idea of the simulation hypothesis. Our night-time dreams are
basically like the simulation hypothesis on a smaller scale.
But it’s not just the Eastern religious or spiritual traditions that
support the idea that we are living in a simulation. In the Western
Abrahamic line of religions (namely, Judaism, Christianity, and
Islam), the implication that we are players in a simulated reality
being watched by entities “outside of the game” is also there, without
being so explicit. These traditions have their own versions of karma,
with the addition of entities who watch our choices and record our
deeds. God uses this record of our deeds to judge us as we enter the
afterlife.
Just who are these entities recording our deeds? According to
some traditions, these entities might be angels, though they sound a
lot like AI that monitors and automatically records our actions and
plays them back to us later.
Video games today have the ability to record our moves in the
game as we play, and these recordings can be reviewed after the
game. Moreover, this idea of “replaying” our actions after the game is
done aligns closely with descriptions of the afterlife from people
who’ve had a near-death experience (NDE) (who describe a “life
review”) and from texts such as the Koran (which describes in detail
a review of your “scroll of deeds” after you die) and the Bible (which
has the concept of the “book of life”).
All of these spiritual ideas—a dreamlike illusory world, karma and
reincarnation, Buddha’s endless Wheel of Life, angels, and eternal
afterlife—fit much better into the model of the simulation hypothesis
than any other scientific paradigm. It seems that these traditions
may have been telling us all along that we are in a simulated reality.
We just haven’t had the technological background until recently to
draw this conclusion ourselves!
Any beings living outside of the simulated reality would appear, at
least to those of us in the simulation, as supernatural beings, gods, or
angels!
Virtual Reality, Artificial Intelligence, and Simulated Consciousness
While it provides a plausible explanation of the mysteries of
quantum physics and the Eastern and Western mystical traditions,
the simulation hypothesis is first and foremost about computation.
Video games wouldn’t be possible without computer graphics, and it
is the development of this relatively new field of science that has
brought the simulation hypothesis out of science fiction and into
serious consideration.
Within computer science, video games and entertainment have
played a unique role in driving the development of both hardware
and software. Examples include the development of GPUs (graphics
processing units) for optimized rendering, CGI (computer-generated
effects), and CAD (computer-aided design), as well as artificial
intelligence and bioinformatics.
The most recent incarnation of fully immersive entertainment
technology is virtual reality (VR). Despite wondering about the
simulation hypothesis for many years, it wasn’t until VR and AI
reached their current level of sophistication that I could see a clear
path to how we might develop all-encompassing simulations like the
one depicted in The Matrix, which led me to write this book.
In 2016, I had a chance to play a VR table tennis game, which I
played using VR goggles and motion controllers. The physics engine
and the reactions of the game were so realistic that I started to forget
I was actually standing in a room with a VR setup and part of me
thought I was actually playing table tennis.
I ended the game, and without thinking I put the “paddle” on the
“table” and leaned against this virtual table. Of course, there was no
table and no paddle, just a controller which I dropped to the floor. I
almost fell over myself, but I realized just in time there was no table
to lean against!
I was reminded of the famous line from The Matrix, when Neo
was wondering how a person inside the simulation could modify a
physical object like a spoon. The truth was that the spoon was just
part of the simulation, a collection of pixels. Neo is told: “There is no
spoon.” In my case, there was no table or paddle!
The advance of computer science, which makes the idea of a very
sophisticated simulation more likely, also raises interesting (and
perhaps troubling) questions about ourselves. For example, futurists
like Ray Kurzweil of Google have suggested that someday we might
be able to download our consciousness into a silicon-based device,
extending our lives indefinitely. At some level, this would mean that
we are just digital information after all.
The idea that consciousness can be digital reveals perhaps one of
the most troubling aspects of the simulation hypothesis. If we are in
a simulation which was created by real beings in some “base reality,”
then it’s possible there are many such simulations. Just as we have
NPCs (non-player characters) in video games that are simulated, if
we are in a simulation then could we ourselves be artificially
simulated consciousness and not real beings?
The idea that we are digital consciousness and that even our
memories may be false brings us back to Philip K. Dick’s questions
about reality and what it means to be a real human versus a fake
one.
The closer we get to digital consciousness and AI that appears
human (referred to as passing the “Turing Test”), the more likely it is
that we may be in a simulation. This doesn’t mean we are all
simulated beings—in fact, one of the reasons I use the video game
metaphor in this book is so we can distinguish between PCs and
NPCs—between real players and simulated characters.
Simulations, Computation, and Chaos
Advancements in digital technology and computation have
impacted our understanding of all the other sciences. Once upon a
time, it was thought that mathematics could provide the answers to
any of the questions about the universe—where a planet would be at
a given time, what the weather would be like, etc. All we had to do
was plug the values into the equations and we would get the answer
we were seeking.
A new branch of science, chaos theory, was born in the 1960s and
1970s out of the realization that equations weren’t enough to predict
outcomes and small changes in inputs or variables could cause large
differences in the outcome of complex natural processes. These
processes include the orbits of planets and stars, the complexities of
weather prediction, the evolution of populations of animals, and
many biological processes.
Stephen Wolfram, the creator of the Mathematica software, has
pointed out that these and many other questions in life may be
computationally irreducible. This means that we would need to run
a computer program through many different steps to figure out
where a particular planet might be, or where a particular particle
may end up in a turbulent flow of particles, or where a biological
population might end up after a number of years. In fact, many
natural processes follow a fractal geometry, such as how a coastline
will zig and zag or how arteries and leaves develop in tree-like
structures.
This science of chaos states that you can’t know exactly what
outcome will come from changing small parameters unless you do
the work of computing or simulating it. This sensitivity to initial
conditions is known as the butterfly effect: When a butterfly flaps its
wings, the seemingly small movement has a bigger effect on the
world, such as causing a tornado or a hurricane in some other part of
the world!
A full understanding of fractal and natural chaotic processes
wasn’t possible until computers were available to run simulated
versions of different fractal equations. You might say that computer
simulations are the bread and butter of this new science.
In each run of the simulation, there are decisions that need to be
made, and these decisions will impact where the simulation goes. A
counterintuitive finding of chaos theory is that even processes that
include seemingly random decisions end up following similar
patterns of complexity.
It sounds a lot like Philip K. Dick’s vision of how sometimes we
need to “rewind” our computer simulation and rerun it to see a
different set of variables before we know exactly where we will end
up!
If the decisions are made by individual conscious entities (i.e.,
players using the video game metaphor), then the simulation we are
talking about may be even more complex than the deterministic
method of natural chaotic processes. The possible input values that
come from something like free will, if it exists for players of this
video game, can lead to wildly different outcomes! The only way to
know where the simulation will end up is to run it! It just may be that
our world is computationally irreducible.
Wolfram and others argue that computation is a part of our
physical world, embedded within all other biological, chemical, and
physical processes. This finding of the universality of computation
and information science makes it even more likely that we are in
some kind of computer simulation and begs the question: What is
this simulation all about?
The Great Simulation—Our Shared Video Game
As I have sought the answers to these questions my entire life,
investigating computer science, video games, physics and the
spiritual traditions, I have come to believe that we are living inside a
giant video game.
I call this video game the “Great Simulation” because this virtual
reality appears to be indistinguishable from physical reality.
If we are living in such a simulation, then it would be far more
sophisticated than any video game we have built or even imagined to
date. It would combine elements of MMORPGs with elements of
virtual and augmented reality built on foundations of technology and
aspects of consciousness—real or simulated—that we don’t fully
understand yet.
Throughout this book, I will delve more deeply into the concepts
introduced in this chapter, including advances in video games and
computer science, some of the unexplainable mysteries unearthed by
physicists about our physical world, and certain tenets of Eastern
mystical traditions and even Western religions. As we examine these,
I will argue, complete with scientific, religious, and science-fiction
references, that they all suggest we are living in the Great Simulation
after all.
We’ll start by looking at the ways in which computer science
could develop to create the technologies needed to develop
something like the Great Simulation. A society which has developed
the necessary technological prowess to create something like the
Matrix has reached an important point, which I call this the
“Simulation Point.” In the first part of this book, I will go into detail
about how we could get from where we are today to the simulation
point. This is basically a roadmap of how to build the Great
Simulation, our version of the Matrix.
The Simulation Hypothesis Uses Information to Explain the
Unexplainable
Everywhere, advances in computer science, simulation
technology, and artificial intelligence are showing the link between
computation and the natural world—biological algorithms, genetic
mappings, fractal algorithms. In fact, with the rise of quantum
computers, which we’ll explore later in this book, even particles in
nature start to look less like physical objects and more like
information.
Throughout this book, we will see that the simulation hypothesis
provides a better explanation for many of the strange phenomena
that science hasn’t been able to explain: How and why does quantum
indeterminacy exist? What happens to consciousness after we die?
Can consciousness be transferred? How are time and space related?
Are they quantized? Why do light and electromagnetic phenomena
play such a central role in physics? If nonhuman intelligences such
as angels exist, where are they located? The simulation hypothesis
can even provide an explanation for aspects of reality that have
mystified scientists, ranging from psychic phenomena to UFOs and
synchronicity.
Most importantly, in this book I hope to offer you a different lens
into understanding our world, using video games as both a metaphor
and a road map to where we are going.
In this regard, the most important aspect of the simulation
hypothesis may not be scientific at all.
By treating the world not as physical (and we’ll see that the
physicists have admitted it is not) but rather as information and
computation, we might be able to come to a more comprehensive
understanding of the natural universe than either our scientists,
philosophers, or religious leaders have been able to give us up to this
point.