Visual signs on a human scale: a classification of display methods of data and a reflection on its scope for humanistic research SUMMARY The purpose of this article is to establish foundations that allow a methodical reflection on different strategies to visualize data from the Humanities. To meet this objective, a set of data visualization methods based on the triple classification of signs proposed by the philosopher Charles S. Peirce will be presented: iconic, indexical and symbolic.

These categories will serve as a guide to define central concepts and discussions about data visualization and the particular needs of its use in Digital Humanities.

Additionally, throughout the text some graphic examples will be offered that will allow us to see more clearly the uses, advantages and disadvantages of the different types of visualizations proposed. ABSTRACT

The main goal of this article is to establish fundamental concepts concerning strategies for data visualization in the humanities. In order to accommodate such goal, a set of methods will be proposed, based on a triple classification of signs defined by philosopher Charles S. Peirce: iconic signs, indexical signs, and symbolic signs. Such categories will serve as a guide to elaborate informed considerations on data visualization and their features when used in humanities research. Additionally, to illustrate more clearly the differences between the types and methods of visualization proposed, some visual examples will be presented along the INTRODUCTION 

Humanistic data visualizations require particular distinctions that have differ from those of other fields of knowledge. When it comes to studying culture through information and graphics, it may be insufficient, and even problematic, to make ex exclusive of visual strategies typical of Statistics, Exact Sciences, Finance, Geo spelling or other disciplines; especially if you don't take a thoughtful stance regarding how enough account can be given of the complex senses in which culture operates. This article Its purpose is to establish some foundations that allow a methodical reflection with respect to regarding the uses and strategies that can be adopted when planning to visualize cultural data those of the Humanities. Here we will describe a series of data visualization strategies based on a famous sa classification of signs proposed by the philosopher and semiologist Charles S. Peirce: the iconic signs unique, indexical signs and symbolic signs (1992b). These categories will serve as a guide for define essential concepts for the creation of information graphics and to raise the needs particularities of its use in the Digital Humanities. In addition, some examples will be offered concrete examples that will allow us to see more clearly the uses, advantages and disadvantages of different types of visualizations, taking advantage of the classification system proposed by Peirce.

FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS 

What to understand by data visualization

In a few words, we can say that data visualization consists of the creation and further reading of visual signs, derived from data, to build an argument or to help give the understanding of human agents. The visualizations, in this sense, allow to obtain a insight about a world – that is, generalized understanding, establishing connections connections that form a structure of thought, the complete vision of the implications of a problem. Data visualizations typically operate as interfaces, serving as a medium that allows communication between two systems: the data system and the thought system human (Scolari, 2004). Like computer peripherals that talk to each other—say, a printer with a computer – or interpreters who communicate to people who do not speak the same language, these graphical processes convert the data, which may or may not follow a logic computationally, in forms interpretable and understandable to humans. The philosophers of mind Clark and Chalmers (1998) propose in their Theory of Mind that they extend Since human beings commonly use objects to replace or augment part of our cognitive ability. For example, we use notes in notebooks to keep part of of our memory, cell phones to communicate at a distance, vehicles to promote our ability to move In the same way, we use visual signs to understand me. better a subject, to see it from another scale or perspective, or to communicate a message or an argument. 



I lied to someone else. It is in this sense that graphics stretch our minds: they enhance our our ability to think and act in the world; They enhance our cognition. Additionally, if we adapt the ideas of the linguists Turner and Fauconnier (2003) to our particular interest, po We could say that data visualizations help to bring to a human scale what operates in extensive spatiotemporal ranges, on immeasurable quantitative scales or in complex relationships between various elements. For example, a timeline can help us bring to scale human temporal ranges that exceed our experience of daily or vital life, since it is an understanding of events. A bar graph, in turn, allows taking aggregates of extensive data and reduce it to visual marks that facilitate comparison and, consequently, insight and future decisions. A graph makes it possible to establish connections between dissimilar elements in order to find a complex structure, an emergent pattern that would not be evident if one considered dera each element in isolation. Computerized production of visualizations makes more efficient efficient and automatic transformation of data that exist on large scales into manual graphs jables for the cognition of a human being. Peirce's classification of signs

Let us now present a brief explanation of the classification of signs that we will use as the basis for the development of this article1. Throughout his philosophical career, Peirce produced multiple revisions, extensions and reductions to his theory of meaning. For example, with res regard to the classifications of signs, produced the synthetic category of three types of signs that we will use here: indices, icons and symbols, but also an exhaustive categorization of 66 types of signs (Borges, 2010). However, his general notion of the sign is structured thanks to the si following trichotomy: a sign relation is composed of the sign itself, an interpretant, and an object. In general terms, the sign, also called representamen, is the vehicle that per hide the meaning. This can be physical or mental, but here we will deal only with physical signs. A data visualization belongs to the latter because, through qualities or features for evils –color, size, shape, composition, etc.– present in their environment –paper, bread size, etc. – allows a person to trigger a performance. The object, for its part, is the thing that the sign is representing. For example, a map is a sign that has as its object a territory. However, it should be said that within this theory an object is not only what it understands Everyday we refer to it as a physical object, it can also be a concept, a cognitive construction, or the insight that is sought with the visualizations. Finally, the interpretant is the act that connects the sign with its object. Brought to contemporary terminology, we could say that the interpretant it is a cognitive development, the process of seeing, thinking, imagining, etc. which allows the sign in find an interpretation in your mind, an idea to anchor yourself to. Thus, triggering an inter interpretation can be understood as a succession of interpretants that become signs of other interpretants. The classification that differentiates signs such as indices, icons and symbols is structured

For an exhaustive reading of Peirce's theories of signs, see Short (2007). according to its relation to its object. Broadly speaking, we speak of icons when there is a resemblance to the object, of indices when there is a direct or causal contact relationship with the object, and symbols when the relationship originates from habit or conventionality. This is how we can also talk about indexical, iconic and symbolic visualizations, if you understand We believe that they are signs that can operate under these relational forms. That's the classification that seeks to develop this text. It must be said that these categories are not exclusive, that is to say: that a sign is of a certain to type does not prevent it from being also of another type. It is, in fact, common that in our daily lives we come across signs that function simultaneously as indices, icons and symbols. Equal Mind you, data visualizations often combine all forms of relationship. However, for For the purposes of this article, we will separate these categories to better understand what possibilities, difficulties and differences offer for the Humanities.

23. Three versions of the concept of data

On the other hand, it is also necessary to make a clarification regarding the multiple meanings two that has had and has the term datum. As it has been well studied by Allés Torrent (2019) and by Rosenberg (2013), the term means different things depending on the activity in which it seeks to apply, and, additionally, its general meaning has changed historically. Here is justified Let me mention three of the senses that will help us to establish important distinctions in the article. On the one hand, there is the data itself, that is, the empirical perception of a event, of an aspect of the world as it is given directly to our perception. A Data, in this sense, is evidence, or is, so to speak, a sample of the truth and reality. dad. According to Rosenberg (2013) this empirical conception is historically recent: in the seventeenth century it was conceived that the data was already given by a force prior to humans -God or mathematics–, and it was not until the 18th century that it began to have a regular use as something that was obtained has from scientific experimentation and observation. On the other hand, we have the data understood as datatype, that is, as the way in which information operable by computers is codified in programming languages. This can to be understood as a primitive element, a fundamental and atomic piece with which they can more complex files can then be built (Flanders & Jannidis, 2018). The most common datatypes are numerical information—for example, integer numbers and floating point decimals— the of the Boolean type –which defines whether or not truth conditions are met: false or true– and the characters – a coded version of an alphabet. These can, in turn, compose structures of more complex data that, based on their configurations, constitute the architectures of operations tion and interactions that define our ways of acting with computers (Manovich, 2013). For example, a sequence of numeric data can encode the colors to be displayed on a screen, or a sequence of characters can encode what humans can read like words. However, character strings, or strings, are not strictly words or sentences, in the sense that they have no semantics for the computer - the word culture can be encoded as a character string: [“c”, “u”, “l”, “t”, “u”, “r”, “a”], but not its meaning–.

Although a computer can store as information a sequence of letters, this by itself

cannot understand the semantic difference between one word and another. same thing happens with colors and an infinity of signs that only make sense to human beings; the machines nas only perform operations on the datatypes, but do not understand the meaning that they can trigger the representations they produce. Finally, we have the data understood as a statistically operable unit. under this

sense we have categorical (ordinal and non-ordinal) and numerical data (Munzner, 2015). The pri meres express the membership of an object to a set, and are, by definition, discrete. By For example, whether a text is prose or verse is a categorical distinction. As with datatypes,

with the statistical data the semantic difference in the categories is not taken into account,

they are only used as containers for differentiable objects. On the other hand, the numerical data expresses a measurable quantity in some of the qualities of the object. For proposing a case, in a corpus the average word length of the verses can be compared with the word length average of prose texts. That is, a numerical data can be produced from counting

the frequency of each category. This differentiation between categorical and numeric is important. in statistics because it helps determine what kinds of operations are possible with what kinds of data. Let's think that, despite the fact that dates are expressed with numbers, they are not really numé rich, but categorical ordinal, since they follow an ordered sequence but cannot be promised diar, or there would be no point in doing so. In the end, they are sets of differentiation that have a structure ra sequential but are not quantities in the strict sense. It is essential to affirm that the data of the Humanities research, for the most part, are coded as categorical data, and therefore For this reason, they do not lend themselves as easily to statistical analysis as other more quantifying disciplines. ble: say, Finance or Physics. Thus, data visualization cannot be reduced to security.

ity and stable standardization of processes on numerical data. Even though he gives them

categorical coughs are countable and their frequency can be established, we could not affirm that their more complex sense is simply in that counting, as is evident with the problems semantics that arise when trying to explain the particularities of a text only through de finish the frequency of certain words. Polysemy, ambiguity and the density of meaning they disappear with categorical generalization.

ICONIC, INDEXICAL AND SYMBOLIC VISUALIZATIONS

Once the theoretical foundations that shape this article are covered, we can make a tour of different types of visualizations according to Peirce's classification of the following us. 

iconic visualizations 

Iconic signs are those in which the sign bears a relationship of resemblance to its 

 object. Although in the semiotic tradition there is a long-standing discussion about what means really saying that something has a similarity (Eco, 2017), here we can stay with a con common sense concept: two things are alike if they share some qualities with each other. As Peirce sees it, iconic signs are closely related to abstract thought. In In his article The Essence of Mathematics (1974), Peirce asserts that hypostatic abstraction is the thought process by which we take a percept and conceive of it as an object in itself, we hypostatize it. For example, take the expression sweet honey and extract the adjective sweet zura to consider it as an object of thought by itself. Thus, if we have in our mind an inventory of abstract qualities, we can see how one object is similar or not to another. By For example, sugar and honey are alike in the sense that they have the abstract quality of Sweetness. An iconic sign resembles what it represents in this same way. For example, a A photo on a document resembles a person in certain ways: color, shape, arrangement tion; but not in others, the size, the two-dimensionality, etc. Although there is a long history of information graphics or the visualization of data, long before the appearance of such terms to name it and the creation of techno computational ologies (Rendgen, 2019), the most established contemporary strategy of vi Data visualization is based on the logic of iconic signs and on the abstraction of information. mation. We can affirm that the book The semiology of graphics by the cartographer Jacques Bertin (2011), originally published in 1968, is the forerunner of the most widespread strategies of contemporary data visualization. There Bertin made explicit the idea that visualizations they are graphic transformations of the abstract information that we extract from the world, that is, they are iconic representations. Subsequently, Lelan Wilkinson, in his book The Grammar of Graphics (2013), originally published in 1999, refined the procedures and established what he called alge display bra. Namely, a system of formal transformations that allow converting the data into readable graphs. Due to this heritage, although there is an increasingly extensive literature tense with respect to data visualization, most theory focuses on a process pu Rarely Iconic: Data Mapping on Brands and Visual Channels. That is, in the projection of da graphic forms that are equivalent, that have a similar relationship with the information mation through hypostatic abstraction. The vast majority of pro-focused software The production of information-based graphics is guided by iconic principles: for example, the pa that ggplot2, from the statistical programming language R, precisely takes its name, its two first letters, from the notion of the grammar of graphics; or the D3 (Data Driven Documents) library, the basis of much of the visualization software for the JavaScript language, and therefore of the internet, is a strict application of Wilkinson's principles. Under this iconic perspective, on the one hand, data must be extracted in a way that Allow it to be formalized. Read, that they can be converted into datatypes and that they can be manipulated as statistical data. Then, a set of visual primitives called marks is taken – basically, the point, the line and the plane – and certain channels or visual qualities are transformed of these marks –position, color, size, shape, inclination, quantity 1). So, say, a bar chart transforms a set of numeric data into the height or the width of a set of bars. That is, it transforms the channel the size of a series of planes according to an abstract correspondence with the data. A pie chart or pie transform a series of ratio data in angles of arc-shaped planes that, as a result, they must build a complete circle. A line graph transforms continuous data into positions marks about an axis. All these examples, quite orthodox, by the way, are iconic: resemble or bear similarity to what they seek to represent under an abstract aspect hi posted. As Wilkinson (2013) proposes, we can understand this type of visualization as a mathematical function: the formalized information is in a domain, and there is another codomi child that contains formal equivalences in terms of visual marks and channels (figure 2). A data has equivalence in position, color, shape, etc. in the graphic world . The homework of who produces the visualization is in choosing the correct function , the adequate transformation for To represent the data, the connection system between domain and codomain. So, the visualization iconic is a regulated and protocolized process that avoids ambiguities and establishes itself as a universal tool. It is not for nothing that Wilkinson called his strategy algebra of visualization, since it is proposed as a mathematically consistent way of converting quantity numerical data and discrete sets in graphs without ambiguity and with clear procedures defined mind.

As stated by Lattmann (2018), the models are iconic constructions that seek to represent establish aspects of resemblance of an object partially, but which have the benefit of being able to make evident traits that would not be easily captured. Let's consider an example. The graphics Presented in Figures 3, 4, and 5 are iconic visualizations of two types of data obtained. two from the processing of the digital raisonné catalog of the Colombian artist Beatriz Gonzalez2. The first type of data is a categorical classification of the predominant color palette. nantes in each of the works present in the catalogue. Each predominant color palette It is composed of ten colors in RGB format obtained using the Color Thief3 library of the len JavaScript programming language. Subsequently, the RGB data from the palettes were converted two by approximation on categorical data, using the following list of twelve colors: yellow, blue, white, cyan, grey, light grey, dark grey, orange, black, red, pink and green. The second type of datum is the numerical count of the presence of the selected colors in the color palettes. Each of the visualizations uses the same data, but corresponds to a different visual function. ferent: Figure 3 is a bar chart that transforms the count into the length of the bars, the number 4 is a donut graph that transforms each count into a cumulative angle, and number 5 is a treemap that transforms the count into a rectangular area. All graphs transform the data categoricals in colors equivalent to the color they represent. As can be seen, the three graphs allow to capture with greater or lesser precision that there is a preponderance of colors grays in the work of Beatriz González –although this is mainly due to artefacts from the digitization: the background color in sculptures or the color of paper in drawings–, and that there is a pre ference for certain particular shades, such as pink, orange, red and cyan. 

Figure 3. A bar chart representing the most common set of colors in Beatriz's work González roasted in the predominant palette of each of his works. Source: self made.

At this point it should be noted that the presuppositions from which the strategy of the iconic visualization are problematic for the Humanities. As stated by Johanna Drucker (2011; 2020), we must be reflective in the face of two important conditions that shape the information graphics: on the one hand, the data is not a transparent replica of the qualities of the world. In other words, there is always interpretation by a subject who collects the data or designs automated collection. Faced with this circumstance, Drucker (2011) has proposed that the term data should be replaced by the term capta, in order to address emphasis on the subjective nature of the act of recollection; this is, as we saw, the contemporary sense analysis of the data as an empirical process. It is precisely the idea of hypostatic abstraction that has Such a condition of data collection is evident: hypostatizing necessarily requires a se Selective appraisal of the qualities of an object. Such selection omits other qualities that may be relevant or may allow for different insights . From Drucker's point of view, the fun algebraic interpretation of data transformation is not really transparent or consistent, despite that it be defended as a mechanized and universalizing process, since those who destroy the algorithms, who make decisions regarding the transformation of the data. For example For example, as stated by Matthew Edney (2019) in his book Cartography, the Ideal and its History, the carto conventional spelling, which points to properly iconic representation values with elements symbolic, omits that the creation of maps is a human act, culturalized, that contains the language syncracy, biases and ideals that, assumed as universal, hide an important part of the visualization as a cultural object. On the other hand, as Drucker states, this type of graph is address an audience, which will also produce performances depending on their abilities cognitions and their particular biases. The double subjective condition of collection and transformation 

Digital Humanities Journal 6, 2021, 64-84 

The interpretation of data and the reading of graphs must be made explicit in the logic of the visualization, and must be regarded as necessarily introducing ambiguity to its apparent process transparent mind (figure 6). Such ambiguity is not negative from a humanistic point of view. co, is, on the contrary, an essential part of communication processes. Thus, here we must state that the non-reflective approach to subjectivity is untenable for the Humanities, because this field of knowledge is precisely defined by the consciousness about culture and the human production, by the development of subjectivities. Unquestioningly adopt a position ture in which data are assumed to be mechanistic transformations of blindly captured data mind is clearly anti-humanistic. 

As a result of its projection as a scientific tool, the predominant iconic strategy in visualization has sparked a growing interest in reading accuracy. For example, the influential study by Cleveland and McGill (1984) established the parameters of a series of in research that attempts to define general principles about how graphs should be constructed so that the people who read them can, first, extract the greatest amount of information relevant and, second, retain that information in memory in the most efficient way. So Similarly, the statistician Edward Tufte (1983) became an influential proponent of a series of principles that promote a deterministic and strict reading of the visualization, free of elements irrelevant and unnecessary coding. The Tuftian style has defined an objectivist strategy which removes the semantic minutiae of graphical representation. However, there are also proposals that try to alleviate the absences present in the traditional ways of visualizing data iconically. For example, Drucker (2011) proposes the creation of coordinate systems variables, that do not follow regular geometric series but rather subjective perceptions regarding the passage of time or the distribution of space (figure 7). Similarly, the work of designers doras Giorgia Lupi and Stefanie Posavec (2018) contrasts with the minimal graphics of the Tuftian style. The works of Lupi and Posavec (2018) follow the main ideas of iconic visualization –the re collection of data and transformation into visual forms by means of functions – but in a way in which it is always evident that the process requires interpretation, both on the part of who produces the graph as of who reads it. This effect is achieved by subverting the con typical conventions that have hitherto been considered good practice in visualization – the elimination of the human factor, one could say–: using unconventional rules, apparently ar bitraries, but which realize that the creation of the visualization interface is also a process of knowledge and expression. Figure 8 shows an example based on an exercise proposed by Lupi and Posavec, the visualization of the subjective perception of intensity and the te matic of a song through time. The example is based on the song where I come from I from the musical group ChocQuibTown4. Thanks to the graph it is possible to notice a certain regularity in the musical intensity, which increases towards the end of the song. It also becomes evident one is thematic structure that revolves around the cultural dichotomies that the musical group points out with with respect to the Pacific region in Colombia. 

indexable visualizations 

Indexical signs are those in which the sign is related to its large object. due to direct contact or causality. For example, footprints in the sand are indexical signs. cos of the walk of a passerby. Or, put slightly differently, we would say that our interpretation of such tracks is that they were caused by direct contact from the passerby you when you step on the sand. Seeing the traces leads to a sequence of interpretants through which We assume causation. If we see it this way, the indexical signs have a particular logic that Unlike other types of signs: they allow us to make conjectures about an event that probably no longer there, or that we do not perceive directly, but that has left inter pretables We understand the marks, the ruins, the footprints, the scars, etc. as historical evidence of a previous event, we assume that the index is a sign that something really happened, or we assume that the index is an aspect of a larger whole that is inaccessible. In terms In general, the indices are usually partial, since contact with the object leaves incomplete signs that require a guess on the part of the person reading them. detective literature is especially adept at using indexes to maintain the narrative of the story; only at the end we know whether our speculations were correct, and whether we were therefore skilfully reading each one of the signs that lead to the resolution of the event. The indexical signs are related to abductive thinking, a cognitive ability tive essential in humans (Peirce, 1992a). Abduction, as opposed to deduction and induction, is the mode of reasoning in which reasonable connections are established through of elements that are not strictly connected by logical consequences or statistical rules cas. It is, in other words, the hypothetical, speculative, conjectural thought that arises from the invention of an explanation that must be verified with the acquisition of more information. Can It can be said that the indexical signs, through abductive reasoning, allow us to arrive at a new knowledge by proxy (Floridi, 2015), or by approximation, in the sense in which we approach can to a phenomenon from indirect variables. For example, the symptoms are proxies of the exist cia of a disease. Thus, the indexical visualizations are those that have not gone through the previous screening of the transformation of data –in its empirical sense– into datatype or statistical data. against Otherwise, indexical display is directly caused by an event. So, in this ca so, is the record of marks or traces left by the object to be studied. In accordance with Offenhuber and Telhan (2018), this type of visualization is the one with the greatest ontological proximity. causation with the subject of study, because it obeys direct causality; the object of study has not been filtering by capture and registration in operable data formats. Unlike iconic strategy, there is no mathematical function that produces the visual qualities of an index image. There is, if you will, a contact function, which defines how data will be captured. traces of the event or phenomenon. This contact function depends on the invention and the ingenuity of who is going to create graphs for a particular problem, since there are no known methods give to build indexical visualizations. Let's look at an example, the superimposition of a series of works in watercolor in format horizontal by the Colombian costumbrista painter Ramón Torres Méndez5 (figure 9). the overlap was obtained through a process of adding colors with the open software ImageJ, following the process described by Ferguson (2017). Through the direct use of the object we want to study –the series of works itself–, and through the process of arranging in a single image the entire visual whole, we reduced the production to a single moment, to a single image that combines all the construction site. This is an example of sampling or sampling, that is, the extraction of direct fragments of the object to obtain a reduced version in terms of information. It is also an example of synthesis by means of superposition. These two methods would constitute the chosen contact function. gives. The qualities of the paintings have not been processed into statistical data, and what we have it is, rather, a kind of indexical average, a trace left by the light of the exposure of all images, similar to the classical photographic method of multiple exposure. Such a process we allows conjectures to be made about the artist's style, about compositional decisions, and even about the content of the works, as shown in figure 10. Although this indexical visualization is harder to read than transparent iconic visualizations, optimized for abstraction it is strictly necessary, with a little abductive effort one can see that the paintings share certain stylistic decisions: diffuse borders, sometimes ornate frames, representations of people and animals, a certain ten dowards centrality, etc. symbolic displays 

The symbolic signs are, finally, the signs that are related to their object by habit.

or by convention. Unlike the indexical and iconic signs, it can be said that the symbols they are arbitrary or unmotivated. In other words, in principle, an interpreting agent can

recognize on their own a causality in an index or a similarity in an icon based on

in your own individual experience, but you may not necessarily make sense of a symbol

what he has not previously learned about through the acquisition of social conventions. The paradigmatic example of this type of signs is natural language. To understand the shovel

bras that are arranged on this page it is necessary to have learned the Spanish code,

for the sense of these words bears no relation to their object by contact or resemblance; No

there is a conjecture or abstract relationship that is useful without prior training.

Symbols are, par excellence, the signs of culture, since it is through habits

built in community that we can have language, arts, history, etc. and that, metaphorically

soft, we can communicate with previous or future generations to ours. They are, then, the

constitution of generic agreements that allow the preservation of information, establishing coordination

social, and give continuity to cultural systems -as stated by Tomasello (2013), in his history

of the origins of language. The symbolic visualizations, therefore, would be the representations

graphic images capable of accounting for the construction of social habit, of the complexities

mantics established by culture, and the intertextual relationships between different human productions

nas. Such visualizations are especially problematic for computing, since, as stated by As before, machine-operable datatypes and statistical data are not capable of being

make distinctions of meaning. On the contrary, semantic distinctions are often left with

signed in metadata annotated by experts. However, as we shall see, despite this limitation

However, it is possible to use certain strategies to provide humans with fruitful interpretations. tiferous

Although they do not belong to the orthodoxy of the iconic visualizations that have dominated the

computer software, there is an elaborate tradition of visual strategies used to communicate

understand the complexities of culture in humanistic research. An important case is

art historian Aby Warburg's project called Atlas Mnemosyne or atlas of memory

(Warburg, 2010). At the end of the 19th century and the beginning of the 20th century, Warburg undertook the task

investigation to find traces of pagan iconography in works of the Italian Renaissance. For

This created a series of panels with images that he gathered under criteria of formal similarity and with

conceptual. By making what we will call here an adjacent collection, Warburg, long before to talk about the field of data visualization and without the massive digital archives of inter net, managed to follow the purposes that we made explicit at the beginning of the article: it produced signs –the panel

as a whole – that helped a human being – him or other researchers – to expand their cog

nition through the selection and thematic arrangement of various elements. The Adjacent Mount of a thematic collection is a symbolic display strategy that allows bringing to scale human, through the timeless spatial conjunction, an enormous expanse of cultural production ral, and allowed Warburg, in fact, to establish part of the foundations of iconography In addition to its importance for the specific field of art history, the strategy Warburg is suitable for humanistic research in general, and deserves careful attention. especially in the search for fruitful visualizations that adapt to the investigative interests. negatives of the humanities, because it is a method that naturally activates the enormous documentation files that record the past. Create collections and arrange them in a space set of visual perception allows us to take advantage of the possibilities of the digital archive without hiding the role of the audience in the construction of meaning. In other words, the adjacent collection facilitates the creation of symbolic connections for an audience because it makes the implicit constructions of cultural habits and traditions. As Peirce stated, the symbols grow (Short, 2007), that is, their meaning expands to the extent that the readings, uses change and communities make readings more complex, a collection is a capture immediate of that process. As an example, figure 12 represents an exercise, inspired by Warburg's work, in which different European representations of the continent are taken American and are arranged alongside commercial or popular culture images in which you can find an iconography and a series of transversal symbolic codes. Particularly, the re colonialist allegorical presentation of America as a half-naked woman holding materials raw and tropical nature.

The adjacent collection is an interpretative exercise that requires certain cultural baggage or a curious exploration of documents in archives; Thus, computation does not replace the construction tion of a conductive thread of the meaning or design of the graph, but rather facilitates the collection and with junction of scattered elements. However, as a complement to the adjacent collection they can produce other forms of visualization that help to complicate the symbolic relations of a more concrete and directed way through iconic abstractions that seek to preserve symbolic structures. Visualizations of relational networks such as graphs and trees are, In this sense, the ideal complement to the Warburgian strategy. As Newman states (2010), "a network is a simplified representation that reduces a system to an abstract structure tract that captures only the basics of connection patterns and little else” (p.2). For example, the gra fos, of which there is an extensive study of their topologies and their mathematical configurations (Ortega Guerrero, 2016), are a strategy that allows to see, in a relatively simple way, concrete relationships such as intertextual winks or connections between narrative elements. TO As an example, Figure 13 presents a graph that synthesizes the most relevant characters within the chapters that make up the history of the Diario de Lecumberri by Álvaro Mutis (1975). together with the intertextual references that Mutis uses to describe some of the characters.

CONCLUSIONS 

The purpose of this article was to establish a classification of data visualization useful to understand the particular needs of Digital Humanities. To build the class sification, the sign model of the philosopher and semiotician Charles S. Peirce was used, which establishes that signs can be divided into iconic, indexical and symbolic signs. How it developed over time of the text, each particular type of sign has a different logic in relation to its object and, consequently, implies concrete forms of meaning that define advantages and Disadvantages for humanistic data visualization. However, as stated before, the class The proposed sification is to some extent artificial, since it assumes each type of sign as an entity differentiated quality, even though in real experience it is common to find graphs that contain relations that correspond to all types of signs. So, more than privileging a strategy magic over another, here it is worth saying that to produce data visualizations it is necessary to take into account account all the types of signs and their mixing possibilities in a way that allows the images promote the extension of cognition and perception on a human scale in research humanistic tion.

The article also sought to defend the idea that HD should assimilate, disseminate and generate generalizing the strategies that are best suited to the study of culture, rather than appropriating thoughtlessly vely the methods of other fields of knowledge. Especially, we must insist on doing explicit subjectivities in data collection and transformation, and in taking advantage of such subjectivities to enrich the senses of the visual signs that support the investigation. Data visualization has a longer history than computing, despite that his theorizing has gained greater strength from the creation of specialized software do and the visual culture of the internet. This new force has brought with it a preponderance of iconic strategy that is insufficient to capture the equally important and complex meanings both indexical and symbolic of human culture. Following this line, it is possible to close these conclusions. affirming that the Digital Humanities can look to the past to find the methods non-computational forms of data visualization that have traditionally existed in practice academic. These methods can shed light on new computational strategies that allow They will allow you to give a fair account of the meanings of your objects of study. This article sought to be a contribution in that direction. A path for future research can be directed in the development of specialized software for humanistic data visualization that balances iconic methods unique, indexical, and symbolic, and that are flexible with respect to subjectivity in collecting, transformation and interpretation of the data.

BIBLIOGRAPHIC REFERENCES 

Allés Torrent, S. (2019). On the complexity of data in Humanities, or how to translate the ideas to data. Digital Humanities Magazine, 4, 1-28. https://doi.org/10.5944/ rhd.vol.4.2019.24679 Bertin, J. (2011). Semiology of Graphics: Diagrams, Networks, Maps. ESRI Press. Borges, P. (2010). A Visual Model of Peirce's 66 Classes of Signs Unravels His Late Proposal of En larging Semiotic Theory. In L. Magnani, W. Carnielli, & C. Pizzi (Eds.), Model-Based Reason ing in Science and Technology: Abduction, Logic, and Computational Discovery (pp. 221-237). Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-15223-8_12 Clark, A., & Chalmers, D. (1998). The Extended Mind. Analysis, 58(1), 7-19. https:// doi.org/10.1093/analys/58.1.7 Cleveland, WS, & McGill, R. (1984). Graphical Perception: Theory, Experimentation, and Appli cation to the Development of Graphical Methods. Journal of the American Statistical Association tion, 79(387), 531-554. JSTOR. https://doi.org/10.2307/2288400 Drucker, J. (2020). Visualization and interpretation: Humanistic approaches to display. The MIT Press. Drucker, J. (2011). Humanities Approaches to Graphical Display. Digital Humanities Quarterly, 5(1). Eco, U. (2017). Kant and the platypus. Pocket-size. Edney, MH (2019). Cartography: The ideal and its history. The University of Chicago Press. Fauconnier, G., & Turner, M. (2003). The way we think: Conceptual blending and the mind's hidden complexities. Basic Books. Ferguson, KL (2017). Digital Surrealism: Visualizing Walt Disney Animation Studios. DigitalHu Manities Quarterly, 11(1). Flanders, J., & Jannidis, F. (2018). The Shape of Data in Digital Humanities: Modeling Texts and Text based Resources. Routledge. Floridi, L. (2015). A Proxy Culture. Philosophy & Technology, 28(4), 487-490. https:// doi.org/10.1007/s13347-015-0209-8 Lattman, C. (2018). Iconizing the Digital Humanities. Models and Modeling from a Semiotic Perspec

tive. Historical Research, Supplement, 31, 124-146. https://doi.org/10.12759/hsr.suppl.31.2018.124-146 Lupi, G., & Posavec, S. (2018). Observe, collect, draw!: A visual journal: Discover the patterns in your everyday life. Princeton Architectural Press. Manovich, L. (2013). Software Takes Command: Extending the Language of New Media. Bloomsbury. Munzner, T. (2015). Visualization analysis and design. CRC Press, Taylor & Francis Group. Mutis, A. (1975). Diary of Lecumberri / The mansion of Araucaíma. Book club. Newman, MEJ (2010). Networks: An introduction. Oxford University Press. Offenhuber, D., & Telhan, O. (2018). Indexical Visualization – The Data-less Information Display. In U. Ekman, JD Bolter, L. Diaz, M. Søndergaard, & M. Engberg (Eds.), Ubiquitous computing, complexity, and culture (pp. 288-302). Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group. Ortega Guerrero, JC (2016). Social networks and their mathematical modeling. Essays Magazine Pedagogical, 19-35. https://doi.org/10.15359/rep.esp-16.1 Peirce, CS (1992a). On the Logic of Drawing History from Ancient Documents, Especially from Tes timonies. In The essential Peirce: Selected philosophical writings (pp. 75-114). Indiana University city Press. Peirce, CS (1992b). What is a sign? In The essential Peirce: Selected philosophical writings (pp. 4- 10). Indiana University Press. Peirce, CS (1974). The essence of mathematics. In JR Newman (Ed.), The shape of thought mathematical. Grijalbo. https://www.unav.es/gep/EssenceMathematics.html Rendgen, S. (2019). History of information graphics. Taschen. Rosenberg, D. (2013). Data before the Fact. In L. Gitelman (Ed.), "Raw Data" Is an Oxymoron (pp. 15-40). The MIT Press. Scolari, CA (2004). Clicking: Towards a sociosemiotics of digital interactions. Gedisa. Short, T.L. (2007). Peirce's Theory of Signs. Cambridge University Press. Tomasello, M. (2013). The origins of human communication. Katz. Tufte, E. R. (1983). The Visual Display of Quantitative Information. Graphics Press. Warburg, A. (2010). Atlas Mnemosyne. Akal. Wilkinson, L. (2013). The Grammar of Graphics. Springer Science & Business Media. 