Visualization and Interpretation by Johanna Drucker (Cambridge: MIT Press, 2020), ISBN 9780262044738 (Hardcover), 195 pages, illustrated and index ($30.00) (Book Review) With Visualization and Interpretation, Johanna Drucker expands upon her arguments made in her previous book, Graphesis. 1 In both works, she argues that data visualization is a value-driven act of interpretation rather than a “neutral” presentation of data, and that
understanding this perspective is essential to a criti- cal study (and deployment) of data visualizations.
(Indeed, Graphesis itself could have been alternately ti- tled Visualization and Interpretation.) What Drucker
adds in the latter work is a more focused analysis of these theories in and for the context of critical
hermeneutics in humanistic studies and critical con- structivist perspectives on the interpretive nature of
knowledge. As a pragmatic accompaniment to these arguments, Drucker presents two core practical approaches to the practice of data visualization: modeling interpretation and nonrepresentational graphical approaches.
Early in the book, Drucker reiterates her argu- ments from Graphesis: that approaches to data visual- ization design that position themselves as simply
“presenting” data in a value-free process (such as those for which Edward Tufte argues2
) obscure both the interpretive and subjective reality of data and the
practice of visualization. In contrast, Drucker’s model- ing interpretation approach to visualization describes
the use of graphic elements and structural frame- works that explicitly require interpretation in their
navigation; such uses include “contradiction, ambi- guity, parallax, and point of view that are fundamen- tally interpretative in character” (p. 76). This approach
is intended to explicitly situate the viewer not simply
as the recipient of knowledge, but as an active co- constructor in the knowledge produced in the work of
data visualization.
Drucker describes the second of her two ap- proaches to visualization design, nonrepresentational
visualization, as a method for creating “interpretative
and discursive artifact[s]” (p. 79). She likens the visu- alization artifact and the underlying data to a map’s
relationship to territory and constructs the nonrep- resentational perspective as a form of protest against
approaches to visualization that set neutrality and transparency as their goal. A nonrepresentational data visualization contrasts with these approaches in
that aesthetic decisions are made that do not repre- sent or express a particular data point but instead are
intended to create an argument with and through the
data. Drucker gives the example of drawing a line be- tween two data points on a chart. This aesthetic act of
mark-making creates a relationship between the two data points that draws the reader’s attention to them,
but the mark itself is not part of the data set and rep- resents a clear editorial intervention on the part of
the designer. The value of these approaches to humanistic work and studies arises through their use of absence,
inquiry, interpretation, and the situatedness of audi- ence and author. According to Drucker, these and
other elements are core to a humanistic approach to
knowledge production. The appendix of the book con- tains many illustrations that usefully demonstrate
these newly proposed graphical approaches in a range
of visualization contexts and use cases, but these visu- al aids are notably absent from the main text itself.
This decision to separate the images from the central
discussion is a strange one; at times in the text, Druck- er seems to be grasping for ways to describe the ap- proaches, when an illustration would have been more
instructive. This separation of images is in stark con- trast to the approach in Graphesis, which showed a
playful and creative approach to enmeshing illustra- tive and graphic components into theoretical writing
about visualization. As Drucker crosses disciplinary boundaries, moving from image analysis to textual analysis,
she seeks to show the wider applications of her sub- ject-oriented approach to knowledge production.
However, there is a notable absence of non-visual media to further expand this discussion. For example, interpretation is inherent in the act of listening, in that “[l]istening discovers and generates the heard.”3
The relationship between seeing, hearing, and inter- pretation would seem to make the field of data soni- fication a prime space of investigation in this con- text. Much like the relationship between a map and
its territory, sound is always already distinct from its source.
Drucker’s position as a key thinker in the critical study of data visualization makes the absence noted here a missed opportunity in her book to expand the established boundaries of the practice. Regardless, the propositional nature of the design techniques she puts forward are a meaningful addition to her already substantial contributions to this field, and the fact
that they invite a broadening analysis of data aestheti- cization practice is a positive reflection on their value
and portability across a range of humanistic fields.