The Power of Memory and Violence in Central America

Introduction: On the Calle del Olvido

La 3a Avenida (Third Avenue) funnels traffc north and south through the heart of Guatemala City to its more far-fung zones and suburbs. It is an unexceptional street and bears a striking resemblance to the Second, Fourth, Fifth, Seventh, and other nearby avenues.1 And like many of these other avenues, and the streets that cross them perpendicularly, la 3a Avenida has another name, one likely to be found in a stroll through Gabriel García Marquéz’s Macondo or, closer to home, in the pages of Guatemala’s Nobel prize-winning author, Miguel Ángel Asturias’ works—the Calle del Olvido. What exactly is being forgotten on the Street of Forgetting is, however, unclear, for few remember or ever knew why it is called that (Fig. 1.1). The Calle del Olvido is lined with houses, shops, and businesses whose frequently painted walls are little more than blank canvases for street artists and activists armed with paint, stencils, posters, and glue, as well as others who are less artistically or politically minded but have similar tools in their hands. The walls are the ideal space on which to make demands on the government or on society, or for these others to lay claim to territory or leave evidence of their presence. Given the tendency—one that seems to border on obsession—of property and business owners to paint over the words and pictures artists, activists, and gang members2 leave in their wake, these are more often than not ephemeral; once painted over, they will be little more than a faint memory in the minds of those who saw them, a memory passersby must work to remember as they travel down the Street of Forgetting.

This book is about words—including the ones street artists paint and plaster on city walls—and the power these words possess to be as violent as they are liberating. It is about how discursive scaffoldings are constructed, word by word, and even stone by stone, to dictate how the violent past is talked about in the present. In times of confict, the power of words is obvious. Repeated declarations that the members of another group are less than human or that their very existence is destroying the nation and “our” way of life are enough to rally one group to do unspeakable things to another. Germany, Rwanda, and Kosovo are clear examples of this. In “post-confict” settings, including in what I label post-Peace Central America,3 words remain violent and can perpetuate physical violence. Violence is not limited to bodily harm. Denying or forgetting the repressive past and its many victims also does a great deal of violence to those victims and their relatives. Paul Ricouer made this point quite clearly when he warned that “forgetfulness” risks killing the victims a second time.4 On the other hand, giving testimony about the past or denouncing what happened can be a life-affrming or even cathartic experience for survivors, relatives, and sometimes even perpetrators (Fig. 1.2). Carlos Ernesto Cuevas Molina was not given the opportunity to tell his story or denounce what he suffered. Relatives and human rights activists have taken on this task, conducting investigations into the events surrounding his forced disappearance and condemning the state for its responsibility. They have worked to prevent forgetfulness from killing Cuevas Molina twice. Twenty-nine years after he was disappeared, his gaze reminds those traveling along the Street of Forgetting that he existed. He reminds us that he, his partner, Rosario Godoy de Cuevas, their son, and tens of thousands of other Guatemalans and Salvadorans were targeted by each countries’ repressive governments and militaries during Cold War-era conficts that pit those governments and militaries against anyone who fought with either words or weapons to upend these exclusionary and exploitative regimes and usher in more just systems. Acts of violence, including Cuevas Molina and others’ forced disappearance, form the backdrop of this book, while “act[s] of defance”—as Liepollo Lebohang Pheko described remembering in the South African context5—and the instinct of erasure that inspires these acts form the project’s core. The focus is on what happens after devastating violence has torn society apart, on how people in Guatemala and El Salvador have proposed to grapple with, overcome, or work through6 such violent and divisive pasts. The question is exceedingly important, yet the answer is far from simple. Different societies have responded in different ways over the years. Some opt for trials, others create commissions to investigate the “truth” of the past, and still others simply refuse to address it. Lying behind these more technical questions related to transitional justice mechanisms is the larger question of whether societies with violent histories will remember or forget their pasts. Is memory the best way to achieve the hoped-for goal of “never again,” or would oblivion be better? Closely linked to this is the question of what parts of the past will be brought to the forefront and remembered, or pushed to the margins and forgotten. Yet another interrelated question revolves around how the past is talked about in the public sphere. The book explores the intersection of these questions. This book is in some ways a mnemohistory, as Jan Assmann labeled his exploration of the grand narrative of Western monotheism, and the place of an idolatrous Egypt in that narrative.7 Like Assmann, I am less concerned with the past as it happened, but with how it is remembered and talked about, how it is recalled and used in the present. I explore the discursive scaffoldings that exist and that determine how contemporary Guatemalans and Salvadorans talk about memory and forgetting and how they frame the usefulness of one or the other in achieving the broad goals of transitional processes, i.e., reconciliation8 and non-repetition. The idea of discursive scaffolding draws on William Roseberry and his discussion of (un)common discursive frameworks. Roseberry bases his argument on Antonio Gramsci’s understanding of hegemony as struggle, and more specifcally as the struggle between elites—most often the state—and subalterns in the political process. Hegemony, Roseberry points out, does not describe subalterns’ consent to their position in society, for they do not accept their subordination. Rather, they resist it, and so hegemony refers to the process in which the terms of the relationship between subalterns and the state are negotiated. It relates to “the ways in which the words, images, symbols, forms, organizations, institutions, and movements used by subordinate populations to talk about, understand, confront, accommodate themselves to, or resist their domination are shaped by the process of domination itself.”9 The hegemonic process, thus, creates neither consent nor a belief system that the state and subalterns both embrace; rather, it works to create “a common material and meaningful framework for living through, talking about, and acting upon social orders characterized by domination.” This framework is partly discursive; it describes the common language that can be used in struggles.10 Subalterns cannot simply use any vocabulary or type of protest to oppose their subordination; rather, they must use the “languages of domination in order to be registered or heard.” In this scheme, the state’s discourse becomes the discourse subalterns must use to challenge the status quo.11 Roseberry concludes that the creation of this kind of common discursive framework is rare.12 Thus, rather than view it as something that the state has achieved, it is best to see it as something the state hopes to achieve. I use discursive frameworks to think about how distinct groups of Guatemalans and Salvadorans talk about the past and express their views on remembering and forgetting. I argue that questions about the role of the past in the present have been answered in different ways in the two countries. Members of Guatemala’s different sectors—from the most conservative with ties to the perpetrators and economic elite, to the most adamant advocate of exhumations and justice—insist very broadly that the past be remembered so that it never happens again. Promoting the work that memory does to prevent repetition is Guatemala’s common discursive framework. This scaffolding shapes and so limits how different groups interact and struggle with each other, always within the context of unequal, but also unstable, social power. Students of transitional justice processes, and especially of restorative justice,13 will be familiar with this refrain of never again. While peace processes like Guatemala’s are, broadly speaking, oriented toward non-repetition, truth commissions and other more specifc transitional justice mechanisms are more particularly rooted in the belief that knowing, and remembering, the long silenced truth about the human rights violations committed during a particular period will prevent repetition, for the now “more knowledgeable citizenry will recognize and resist any sign of return to repressive rule.”14 Importantly, and counter to Roseberry, it is non-state actors who have to a large extent determined how the past is framed in Guatemala. Insisting on the importance of memory in preventing repetition is the discourse of the country’s two truth/historical commissions and the domestic, and international, human rights community. Though commissioners and leaders of the human rights community can be considered elite because of their above average knowledge of how the state operates and their greater access to the international community and its funding opportunities, they are also certainly subalterns in terms of their domestic economic and political infuence. Conservatives and those with an agenda counter to the human rights community’s must use the human rights community’s discourse to oppose that sector’s message and work. Thus, instead of openly declaring that Guatemalans must forget to prevent repetition and to ensure reconciliation, conservatives repeat the human rights community’s call for memory. Yet they do so in such a way that, if the meaning is interrogated, if the surface discourse is peeled back, it becomes clear that they are, in fact, celebrating a sweeping, and deliberate, forgetting. When conservatives speak of the importance of amnesty, of perdón (pardon or forgiveness), and indeed of reconciliation itself, the human rights community understands these words, as synonyms for forgetting. Indeed, when conservatives call for perdón or reconciliation, the human rights community reminds Guatemalans quite loudly that far from forgetting the confict, it must be remembered. El Salvador’s public conversations about the war are not limited by a common discursive framework. Instead, conservatives and the human rights community each have their own discursive scaffoldings that compete against each other in the public sphere. In this, conservatives have the upper hand because the mainstream media and political, social, and economic elite support the conservative agenda and so work to make conservatives’ framework for talking about the past common. In terms of the place of the past in the present, conservatives, led by members of the Alianza Republicana Nacionalista (ARENA, Nationalist Republican Alliance), have come to settle on a discourse rooted in the benefts of forgetting; they have loudly and repeatedly celebrated the work forgetting does to achieve reconciliation and non-repetition. They believe this forgetting will be achieved via amnesty. The human rights community, on the other hand, sees forgetting as doing little more than promoting impunity and facilitating repetition. They insist that only truth will prevent repetition, much as the language of transitional justice dictates. This truth-centered discourse is El Salvador’s counterdiscourse, one that refuses to let conservatives’ dominant discourse of forgetting be the only option heard in the public sphere. Thus, El Salvador’s discussions about the past are characterized by what might be called an uncommon discursive framework.

Tangled up with Guatemala and El Salvador’s common and uncommon discursive frameworks are what Steve Stern called emblematic memory. Emblematic memory selects which memories will be included in a society’s collective memory and what signifcance these memories will have. Stern explains that “Memory is the meaning we attach to experience, not simply recall of the events and emotions of that experience.”15 Importantly, though it is an invention, this memory scaffolding cannot simply be erected and shaped on a whim but must speak to and refect lived experiences and events. These lived experiences and events most often are instances of societal rupture or trauma, moments that prove to be turning points in history and are understood as foundational.16 Certainly Guatemala and El Salvador’s long and violent conficts, and the peace accords that ended them, ft into this category. Emblematic memory acts as a blueprint for a society’s understanding of itself and its history. As it sorts memories into important and unimportant, into accepted and rejected, into remembered and forgotten, emblematic memory necessarily dictates what will be silenced, what will be pushed to the background and subordinated to the dominant group’s narrative of the past. After all, as Stern writes, the “making of memory” is also the “making of silence.”17 Silence, especially in relation to telling a story or narrating the past, deserves a brief aside here. In Memory, History, Forgetting, Paul Ricoeur argues that in deciding how to tell a story, “one can always recount differently, by eliminating, by shifting the emphasis, by recasting the protagonists of the action in a different light along with the outlines of the action.”18 Michel-Rolph Trouillot sees history not merely as “what happened” but also “what is said to have happened.”19 He points out that “bundles of silences”20 exist in the stories we tell about the past. These silences are created at four distinct moments of historical production: at the moment of fact creation, at the moment of fact assembly, at the moment of fact retrieval, and at the moment of retrospective signifcance. None of these moments are “natural” or “neutral.” Rather, including and excluding information are active, complementary processes, for the presence of some information requires the absence of other information.21 It is clear that narratives are produced by frameworks like the ones Roseberry and Stern discuss that limit what can be and is remembered according to group membership. Importantly, these narratives also reproduce those frameworks and their limits.

Returning to emblematic memory, Stern identifed four emblematic memories in post-Pinochet Chile, each embraced by a different group. These emblematic memories determine how Augosto Pinochet and the gross human rights violations committed during his dictatorship are remembered and understood: memory as salvation, memory as unresolved rupture, memory as persecution and awakening, and memory as a closed box. All of these emblematic memories silence certain aspects of the past in accordance with a particular interpretive framework. Without a doubt, similar, though not identical, emblematic memories exist in both Guatemala and El Salvador. For example, there are certainly many who see the 1954 coup in Guatemala that ousted leftist president Jacobo Árbenz, an event that was a precursor to the formation of the frst guerrilla movements, as a moment of salvation, just as many conservatives see the 11 September 1973 coup against Salvador Allende, and Pinochet’s subsequent rise to power, as salvation.22 In both cases, the country was rescued from communism. And as in Chile, there are many Salvadorans and Guatemalans who see the violent past as divisive and best forgotten lest it destroy any hope for reconciliation and peace. These individuals seek very consciously to forget the past, to close the box in which a community’s memories are stored.23 In separate works, Héctor Lindo-Fuentes, Erik Ching, and Rafael Lara-Martínez and Mneesha Gellman explore ways of speaking about the past in twentieth and twenty-frst century El Salvador. These can function like discursive frameworks tangled up with emblematic memory. The same is true of Ellen Moodie’s incisive explorations of how Salvadorans talk about crime in the post-Peace Accords era. In Remembering a Massacre in El Salvador, Lindo-Fuentes, Ching, and Lara-Martínez examine the creation and perpetuation of a classbased understanding of the 1932 massacre, and the related downplaying of indigenous communities’ role in mobilization leading up to the massacre. Indeed, they argue that a metanarrative of 1932 rooted in “communist causality” does more than downplay the role of indigenous communities; it works to erase—Stern might say silence—both ethnicity as a determining factor in the “uprising” that preceding the massacre and indigenous leadership in peasant mobilization. This narrative dominated for decades since it was convenient for both those on the right and left, but it is increasingly being challenged by an indigenous-centered understanding of 1932.24 Gellman’s fascinating work on the Nahua in Izalco and Lenca in northern Morazán pushes Lindo-Fuentes,Ching, and Lara-Martínez’s work into the present. In Democratization and Memories of Violence, Gellman takes the memory of cultural loss as a result of 1932, though not empirically accurate, as a starting point. She argues that, in Morazán, as in 1932, narratives of the civil war “render originarios [indigenous peoples] invisible by inserting their experiences into class frameworks.”25 Gellman continues, arguing that “the civil war replaced uniquely originario narratives with guerrilla-infused narratives,”26 which is signifcant for making identity-based demands on the state in the context of twenty-frst century cultural resurgence. In both cases, these alternative/subaltern narratives must break out of the confnes of previous class-based frames of understanding 1932, which is perhaps why the Lenca are struggling so much to be heard. Ching’s work, Stories of Civil War in El Salvador, is also important to consider for its description of memory communities. Ching poured over dozens of memoires and testimonials, which he views as memory sites, to better understand the struggles over memory that have taken place in El Salvador since the civil war ended in 1992. He identifed “four memory communities, each of which advances a distinct and mutually exclusive version of the past.”27 These are the civilian elite, offcers, guerrilla commanders, and rank-and-fle actors. These different memory communities jockey for dominance in the public sphere, struggling against the others to get their interpretive framework to dominate. As for Moodie, her study of crime stories, critical code-switching, and democratic disenchantment reveals what happens when a framework of understanding breaks down. With the signing of the Salvadoran Peace Accords, El Salvador entered into an era of peace, but it did not feel that way. Crime was rampant. During the war, crime had been political, and people (thought they) knew how to avoid it—by not becoming involved in politics. In the post-Peace era, from the point of view of the state, crime could no longer be political; it could no longer be critical because the country had entered a new, non-violent era. Rather, “All crime was noncritical, in the three senses of the term—the state was not in jeopardy, the action did not challenge the state, and indeed the crime hardly had the weight of a critical event.”28 All crime, therefore, became common. Moodie adds that declarations that things are worse than the war is a rejection of the state’s efforts to frame the peace as successful by re-framing crime as common. In this sense, the state has to some extent been able to establish a common discursive framework; rather than loudly affrming that crime is political, those who oppose the state’s view that El Salvador is at peace instead speak of the sheer volume of common crime. Numerous works on Guatemala reveal the existence of similar types frameworks that operated in the past and continue to operate today, meshing together to shape how Guatemalans “live through” and think about, as Roseberry wrote, the past and the present and determine what will be remembered and what will be forgotten. Michelle Bellino’s Youth in Post-war Guatemala stands out. Bellino conducted ethnographic research in four high schools in Guatemala to investigate not necessarily what students know about the armed confict, but how what they learn about past injustice shapes their formation as citizens. Importantly, Guatemalan youth’s “historical interpretation” is guided by the adults in their lives, both in school and at home.29 Like Ching, Bellino identifes two memory communities that “contribute to Guatemala’s social and political divisions: one working to make the history of the Conficto Armado present and the other working to erase it—whether through acts of violence or on the grounds that contemporary violence renders past violence irrelevant.”30 This breakdown certainly resonates with the argument presented in this book. Bellino adds an additional layer of analysis to this by arguing that the four schools she spent time at, each representing four distinct demographic and geographical groups, have distinct, though not necessarily unifed, ways of understanding the confict and the role of memory in the present and future. Francisco Goldman’s The Art of Political Murder also bridges discussions of past and present violence in Guatemala and how the state discursively frames them. The book recounts the twists and turns in the investigation into the assassination of monseñor Juan Gerardi who, with his colleagues in the Catholic Church’s Proyecto Interdiocesano de Recuperación de la Memoria Histórica (Remhi Project, Interdiocesan Project for the Recuperation of Historical Memory) worked precisely to counter the military’s dominant framework of understanding the rural— and indigenous—population as el enemigo interno, the internal enemy. For the military, this understanding, justifed action against rural communities. On the other hand, prosecutors have used military plans to make this point about el enemigo interno to demonstrate, for example, that former de facto head of state Efraín Ríos Montt was responsible for genocide. As in El Salvador, framing the military’s targeting of indigenous communities as either politically or racially motivated has an impact on contemporary struggles.

Gerardi was assassinated as a result of the Remhi Project’s efforts to re-write the story of the confict, to re-set the limits of what is deemed to be true and what is false. The investigation into his death revealed not only high level state involvement, but also new frameworks for understanding post-Peace violence, much as Moodie described in El Salvador. Signifcantly, Goldman reveals the state’s attempts to frame the assassination as “common” by naming a criminal band as responsible.31 This, framing, in turn, helps shed light on the tendency to frame violence in Guatemala as gang related. A discursive framework that places responsibility for crime on youth gangs works not only to criminalize youth, as Deborah Levenson and Bellino make clear, but also to build support for counterproductive mano dura, or iron-fsted, anti-crime policies.32 With high levels of public support for such policies, those who struggle against a dominant framework that depicts gang members as psychopaths, and not as disaffected youth with few opportunities in life, face an uphill battle. I use Stern’s idea of emblematic memory to better understand how, always within particular discursive frameworks, different sectors interpret the same event or series of events (i.e., the conficts themselves) in different ways. I prefer to imagine the discursive frameworks Roseberry describes as scaffoldings, especially as discursive frameworks become tangled with emblematic memory. Builders do not erect a meters-tall scaffolding around the area where the structure will stand, and then build the structure itself. Instead, one is integral to the other, and vice versa. The scaffolding rests on the already constructed walls as it also shapes the form the structure will take as workers continue to build. As much as the building dictates the form the scaffolding will take, the scaffolding limits builders’ options. They are interdependent. That said, I do use the terms framework and scaffolding largely interchangeably. Returning to the idea that different sectors have different memories of the past, this is just what Maurice Halbwachs’ study of collective memory and “social frameworks” suggest, and it is what the other studies cited here make clear. Patrick Hutton describes Halbwachs’ views quite effectively. An “elaborate network of social mores, values, and ideals,” Hutton writes, “mark[s] out the dimensions of our imaginations according to the attitudes of the social groups to which we relate.”33 Inspired by the several truth commissions that helped establish the scaffoldings that dictate how the past is discussed in both countries, I describe these different memories or understandings of the violent past as truths. And the “s” is important, for there is space for different versions or truths of the confict to exist within the two countries’ (un)common discursive frameworks. Importantly, however, not all truths are equally true, for not all truths are supported by testimonial, forensic, and archival evidence. In both countries, the weight of evidence lies heavily on the side of the truths revealed or confrmed in the truth commission reports and embraced by human rights organizations. Generally speaking, this truth stands in contrast to what conservatives insist happened despite overwhelming evidence to the contrary. In El Salvador and Guatemala, as in many other places, determining the truth of what happened is seen as an essential item on the agenda of those negotiating peace agreements and involved in other transitional processes. This is especially true in the minds of international brokers and facilitators, but also for the domestic human rights community and its allies. Truth and other similar historical commissions are created to answer the question of what really happened during the confict. The issue of the truth, however, is not so easily resolved, as conservatives in both Guatemala and El Salvador reject the truth that these commissions revealed and instead use all the means at their disposal to promote their own truth of what happened. As a result, the two societies have witnessed struggles over the truth of the past since the reports were published (and even long before this) and different sectors have consistently promoted their truth as the one and only truth.34 Broadly speaking, in Guatemala, the human rights community’s truth of the confict mirrors the truth the testimonies collected by the Remhi Project and the UN-backed Comisión de Esclarecimiento Histórico (CEH, Historical Clarifcation Commission) narrated. It is also clear in various other works, including Jonás Moller’s Rescatando Nuestra Historia, Rigoberta Menchú and Elizabeth Burgos’s I, Rigoberta Menchú, Goldman’s The Art of Political Murder, Ricardo Falla’s Masacres en la Selva and Quiché Rebelde, Marta Elena Casaús Arzú’s Genocidio, Daniel Wilkinson’s Silence on the Mountain, Jean-Marie Simon’s Guatemala: Eternal Spring, Eternal Tyranny, Jennifer Schirmer’s The Guatemalan Military Project, Victoria Sanford’s Buried Secrets, Ricardo Sáenz de Tejada’s Oliverio, Louisa Reynolds’ The Long Road to Justice, Simonne Remijnse’s Memories of Violence, and Diane Nelson’s Reckoning. 35 In these works, and for the human rights community, an estimated 200,000 died or were disappeared. The military and its proxies, most signifcantly the Patrullas de Autodefensa Civil (PACs, Civil Self-Defense Patrols), committed over 90% of these tens of thousands of human rights violations. Notably, the CEH also concluded that the military had committed acts of genocide against particular indigenous communities in the early 1980s. This is the human rights community’s truth, and this (i.e., military responsibility and genocide) is what they are talking about when they call for the past to be remembered. The contents of this truth are determined by the human rights community’s emblematic memory of the confict that dictates that the internal armed confict (and indeed, Guatemala’s much longer history of repression and violence) be understood in a particular way. This framework not only sorts past events and incidents into true and false, but also helps group members understand that the military and its proxies committed human rights violations and not excesses and that the military’s actions were inspired by deep-rooted racism and not simply anti-communism. Conservatives’ truth is also framed by their own particular emblematic memory, and it is distinct from that of the human rights community. Conservatives focus on the guerrilla’s actions, highlighting that they were the ones who took up arms and brought violence to Guatemala. From this perspective, the military was only protecting Guatemala from the threat of international communism, as embodied by the guerrilla. Conservatives understand the confict through this framework. It allows them to focus on the guerrilla’s crimes, while not necessarily denying that the military committed excesses—indeed, in the 2010s, some came to talk quite calmly about army massacres as crimes against humanity. But they insist that these violations were committed for ideological purposes. The military was fghting communists, not indigenous peoples. Thus, and very importantly, genocide was not committed in Guatemala. The denial of genocide became increasingly loud in the 2010s and represents not a shift in Guatemala’s common discursive framework centered on memory, but a renewed challenge to the human rights community’s emblematic memory and truth of the confict. Different sectors of Salvadoran society also interpret that country’s civil war in distinct ways depending on the emblematic memory of the social group to which they belong. Thus, a range of truths also survives in the public sphere. Ching made this clear, though he did not explore the human rights community’s view of the past.36 In El Salvador as in Guatemala, the human rights community’s emblematic memory understands the war, and the emergence of the guerrilla, as being a result of structural injustice and repression of both dissent and activism. 

This understanding is also echoed in numerous works on the war, including Chiyo’s Siete Gorriones, the Mujeres por la Dignidad y la Vida’s Y la Montaña Habló, Gloria Guzmán Orellana and Irantzu Mendia Azkue’s Mujeres con Memoria, Manlio Argueta’s Un Día en la Vida, Joaquín M. Chávez’s Poets and Prophets of the Resistance, Molly Todd’s Beyond Displacement, and Elisabeth Jean Wood’s Insurgent Collective Action and Civil War in El Salvador. 37 With this view, the human rights community assigns responsibility for human rights violations in much the same way that the Salvadoran Truth Commission did. Thus, for the human rights community, the military and paramilitary organizations were overwhelmingly responsible for human rights violations committed especially against women, children, and the elderly. More than this, the human rights community’s emblematic memory insists that these violations be understood not as unfortunate incidents, but as part of the military’s larger and well-planned counterinsurgency campaign, a campaign that targeted civilians. On the other hand, though conservatives have maintained throughout the post-Peace era that only forgetting will improve the Salvadoran future, they do also remember and talk about the past. As Moodie’s investigation makes clear, it can be important to remember the past if one is in the process of convincing people that a break with the past has taken place, for example through the signing of Peace Accords. The offcers and the civilian elite’s life stories that Ching examines, some of which I also analyzed, are also clear evidence of remembering. Conservatives reject the idea that the causes of the Salvadoran Civil War include injustice and repression. Conservatives’ emblematic memory frames the war as a battle to the death against communism, against the nightmare of El Salvador becoming another Cuba or Nicaragua. This view sees the guerrilla, who came together to form the Frente Farabundo Martí para la Liberación Nacional (FMLN, Farabundo Martí National Liberation Front) in 1980, as the instigators of the confict. Such an understanding of the war means that, though conservatives rarely mention the Truth Commission by name, they nevertheless reject its fndings. They declare that the Truth Commission’s truth, and so that of the human rights community, is partial; it is both incomplete and biased. Instead, they embrace a truth that emphasizes the guerrilla’s crimes—the frst of which was to take up arms—and ignores or silences the military’s crimes. More than a simple rejection of military responsibility for gross human rights violations, and guided by an emblematic memory that sees the guerrilla as destroying the nation, conservatives refuse to accept that Roberto D’Aubuisson, their hero and the founder of ARENA, did anything criminal during the war. This despite weighty testimonial and archival evidence that makes it clear that he did. Emblematic memory is not permanent. Dominant memory frameworks can change over time and dissident memories can become more mainstream and socially important. However, Stern argues that this shift in the dominant memory framework only happens when these dissident emblematic memories become more widely circulated, for example in the media.38 And as the emblematic memory or memory framework shifts, memories and the meanings attached to them shift and once-dominant memories become dissident, as the frameworks that dictate that they are important do. In El Salvador, the 2009 election of FMLN candidate Mauricio Funes to the presidential palace represented an incomplete shift. Though the FMLN and the human rights community are far from identical, with Funes’ election, the offcial, presidential narrative came to resemble the human rights community’s discursive framework, emblematic memory, and truth. This stands to reason. As Halbwachs argued, social frameworks “reconstruct an image of the past which is in accord, in each epoch, with the predominant thoughts of the society.”39 With a president who declared himself to be inspired by monseñor Romero, it makes sense that the human rights community’s framework for understanding the war should gain infuence. Yet despite increased exposure in the media, it did not become predominant in the way Halbwachs describes because conservatives continue to control the media and maintain political and economic dominance. So, while the human rights community’s discourse became more visible, conservatives did not simply let this happen. Instead, the hegemonic struggle between discursive and memory scaffoldings became more visible. The very public struggle between the Salvadoran human rights community’s and conservatives’ discursive and memory scaffoldings points to the importance of enriching an understanding of Halbwachs’ comments about shifts in social frameworks by incorporating Roseberry’s, and so Gramsci’s, thoughts on resistance and hegemony. Halbwachs writes that those groups that are able to determine the social frameworks that shape a group’s memory “fade away in time, making room for others.”40 Roseberry, on the other hand, highlights the struggle inherent in the process of trying to determine perhaps not specifcally what people remember, but the related issue of how they talk about social concerns Rather than quietly disappearing or losing social or political power, elites do all they can to remain in power in the face of subalterns’ efforts to improve their place in the social order, or even to overturn it. Their use of the language of domination does not mean that they accept that domination. It is useful to take this into consideration when reading Halbwachs. Halbwachs does acknowledge that social power is important in the continued existence of a group and its frameworks, but, as is clear in the Salvadoran case, the process of “fading away” he talks about involved high levels of resistance and contestation. Roseberry, Stern, and Halbwachs’ interconnected ideas point to the existence of things—scaffoldings or frameworks—that determine how and what societies remember (and forget) and how we talk about these events. In an incessant process of negotiation and contestation, these ever-changing frameworks dictate and limit the language and images that will be accepted in debates around the meaning of the past, present, and future. Comparing the scaffoldings that exist in Guatemala and El Salvador and the ways the past is talked about in the public sphere reveals striking differences in two countries that are sometimes seen as having similar pasts and presents. Both suffered from similar Cold War-era conficts that both ended with UN-brokered Peace Accords that failed to truly address either the immediate or more historic causes of the conficts. As well, the two countries have been drowning in violence ever since the Peace Accords were signed, a good deal of it related to corruption, impunity, narcotraffcking, and youth gangs, and the entanglement of these and other factors, much of it frmly rooted in past structures of inequality and repression. Yet despite the similarities in past and present violence, the two countries have very different ways of talking about the past. The purpose of this investigation is to shed light on the different frameworks that dictate how the past is talked about in the two countries, and not specifcally to explain why this might be the case. The reasons for this are as varied as they are interconnected. That said, it is clear that the relative strength and weakness of different sectors in the two countries plays a role in their ability to guide the terms of the debate. In particular, explorations of Guatemala and El Salvador’s discursive and memory scaffoldings reveal the relative infuence of Guatemala’s human rights community when compared to El Salvador. The Guatemalan human rights community is certainly stronger than its Salvadoran counterpart because of its independence from Guatemalan guerrilla organizations, which is related to the inability of the Unidad Revolucionaria Nacional Guatemalteca (URNG, Guatemalan National Revolutionary Unity) to transition into a successful political party in the post-Peace era. The Guatemalan human rights community’s ability to attract international funding is also signifcant. The relative strength of the Guatemalan human rights community has played a role in its ability to shape post-Peace conversations and narratives about the past so that those who promote forgetting must to do so within a discursive context where memory leads to non-repetition. We left Cuevas Molina looking out at us on the Calle del Olvido. During the conficts, activists were largely unsuccessful in their quest to discover what happened to him and other Guatemalans and Salvadorans. However, in Cuevas Molina’s case and that of 182 others, the publication of the Diario Militar, or Death Squad Dossier, smuggled out of Guatemala in 1999, shed some light on his fate. The Diario Militar is a list compiled by Military Intelligence of the names, pseudonyms, and photos of 183 of the tens of thousands of Guatemalans the military targeted. It reveals extensive surveillance of political and other organizations, as well as the fate of the 183 individuals named. Seeking, it seems, to conceal its responsibility for the range of illegal activities in which it was involved, Military Intelligence used codes to describe what had happened. Penciled below the type-written information about Cuevas Molina’s abduction at 10 a.m. on 15 May 1984 in Guatemala City’s Zona 1, on the 3a Avenida and 5a Calle, are a series of numbers: 01-08- 84: 300. Cuevas Molina was assassinated on 1 August 1984, almost three months after he was captured. Unfortunately, and despite the non-stop efforts of organizations dedicated to the task of fnding the dead and disappeared, most notably the Fundación de Antropología Forense de Guatemala (FAFG, Forensic Anthropology Foundation of Guatemala), the whereabouts of his and most others’ remains are still a mystery.41 And it is precisely because this mystery remains that El Salvador and Guatemala’s journeys down the Calle del Olvido have not been and will not be smooth and free from reminders that something happened in the past that must be addressed and worked through, not painted over as if it had never happened, as if the dead and disappeared had never existed. 

A Note About Language and Sources

In Reckoning: The Ends of War in Guatemala, Diane Nelson speaks of engaño (duplicity) and being two-faced. She writes about a conversation she had with a catechist in Patzulá, a small community near Joyabaj, Quiché. The catechist told her he had also been the leader of the PACs in the community. He said, “‘I have two faces’….‘One I show to the army, the other I show to my people.’”42 After hearing numerous declarations like this and other stories that make a similar point, Nelson wonders who was being duped? She writes, “In one case, when it thought it made the catechist work for them, the army couldn’t see his second face. In the other [case, when, as Doña Miguela told Nelson, the “bad” people in the community “‘would tell the army that someone was a guerrilla when they were not’” to settle an often long-standing disagreement or to get “a little bit of land”], as bad people tricked [the army] into acting for them, [the military] didn’t see how they were being used for very local ends.”43 Though this dissertation does not address the issue of engaño, the idea that people have two (or more) faces is important. In the range of sources consulted for this project, I explore the face people choose to show in public, the statements and declarations they choose to make. Their other face(s) remain hidden. I also acknowledge the potential diffculties related to translation, for example to reading palabras and writing about words. In cases where the English translation falls short of capturing the various dimensions of a word in Spanish, as in the case of perdón, I explain these dimensions and use the Spanish word. More generally, I have worked to maintain the multi-dimensionality of and the feeling behind the palabras I write about as words. Research for this book was conducted over the course of several stays in Guatemala and El Salvador between 2012 and 2013, and again in 2017. Much of that time was spend in the two countries’ hemerotecas, or newspaper archives, leafng through newspapers since 1996 and 1992, respectively. These newspapers will be discussed in greater depth in the next chapter. Another signifcant written source consisted of the publications of human rights and other organizations and government institutions related to the conficts, as well as their webpages or social media pages. Testimonios and (auto)biographies of those who participated in the conficts or peace negotiations, as well as other works they have written, form a fnal component of the written sources consulted. As for non-written sources, or at least sources not written on paper, I observed protests, demonstrations, trials, and commemorations; visited the exhumation at Guatemala City’s La Verbena cemetery, monuments related to the conficts in both countries, and both countries’ military museums; and spent time walking around Guatemala City and San Salvador, appreciating the work of street artists and mural painters. I also conducted formal interviews and had more informal conversations with 31 human rights activists, former military offcers, academics, and journalists.44 Together, these sources helped me explore the way the past is talked about in the two countries and the struggles that take place on the edges of these conversations as different groups negotiate or reject the limits placed on the words they use or seek to impose their own discursive limits.
