Humanized museums? How digital technologies become relational tools

Digital technologies are acknowledged as tools to foster visitors’ engagement. However, it has not been further investigated how digital technologies might be a medium for museums to rethink their relationship with visitors. This study enters this issue, acquiring the institutional perspective of the cultural institution in charge of designing digital relational experiences with and for visitors. The research applied the Co-Creation Framework (CCF) by Ramaswamy and Ozcan (2018), to the museums’ field, exploring: (i) how digital technologies enable new systems of interactions among museums and visitors; (ii) how museums rethink their relationship with visitors through these systems of interactions. We conducted a multiple case study on four Italian museums. The findings highlight the potential of digital technologies to ‘humanize’ museums in their relationship with visitors. This paper enriches the understanding of digital technology as a relational medium, to connect museums and visitors.

Introduction

The cultural experience has been defined by Campos et al. (2018) as the sum of events or activities in which the visitor actively takes part, physically and/or mentally, with other people, in the experience environment. Also, according to Prahalad and Ramaswamy (2004), the service experience coincides with the moment of the encounter between the service provider and users. During the service experience (i.e., the cultural experience), the service provider (i.e., the cultural institution) and users (i.e., visitors) establish a dialogue and a complex system of interactions, co-creating value for both of them (Prahalad and Ramaswamy 2004). In this context, digital technologies have deeply affected the cultural experience as it was traditionally conceived, both for museum professionals and visitors (Kéfi and Pallud 2011). In particular, visitors seek interactive experiences and cultural institutions have been required to shift from a curatorial perspective to a visitor-centered approach; visitors become actors and co-creators of values that go beyond economic and financial aspects. A wide number of studies provide the evidence that digital technologies are tools that might positively or negatively affect the visitor, focusing on visitors’ satisfaction, visitors’ perception, their level of engagement and considering the cultural experience as the outcome (e.g., Antón, Camarero, and Garrido 2018; Light et al. 2018; Kirova 2020). Nonetheless, these studies underestimate the institutional perspective, which is related to the strategic design of the cultural experience, its digital infrastructure and the expected system of interactions between the cultural institution and the visitors. Additionally, most of the contributions in the literature focus on digital technologies as mere practical tools and their impact in making the cultural experience more interactive (e.g., Moorhouse, Tom Dieck, and Jung 2019), but just a few of them address the relational potential of digital technologies as a means to connect museums and visitors fostering value cocreation (Nowacki and Kruczek 2021). The research takes the institutional perspective, considering digital technologies not simply as operative tools, nor as solutions but as a relational medium. More specifically, this paper investigates (i) how digital technologies enable new systems of interactions between museums and visitors; (ii) how museums rethink their relationship with visitors through these systems of interactions. This paper adopts a case study methodology focusing on four Italian museums, which developed novel cultural experiences leveraging digital technologies. The Co-Creation Framework (CCF) by Ramaswamy and Ozcan (2018) has been used to qualitatively analyze the approach adopted by museums to design the digital experience as a value co-creation process, considering the interactions within four main elements, mentioned by the CCF as artifacts, persons, processes and interfaces. Results show three interconnected levels through which museums rethink their relationship with visitors: (1) the nodes, referring to the type of elements in interaction during the visitor experience; (2) the connections within the elements that shape the visitor experience; (3) the expected relationship between museum and visitor. The paper is articulated as follows. The theoretical background in the first section presents the current digital transformation in museums with a focus on the visitor experience and the cultural experience as a co-creation process between museums and visitors. The second section outlines the methodological approach, while the third section deepens the results. The last section further discusses the results, consistently with the existing literature and managerial implications of the research. 

Digital technologies: visitor and museum in interaction 

Museums have long been required to go beyond a curatorial-oriented approach, moving toward a visitor-centered approach, enhancing the active role of the visitor (Falk 2016). In this light, some scholars underlined the importance to rethink and reshape their relationship with visitors, incorporating a dialogic perspective (Smørdal, Stuedahl, and Sem 2014) onto the cultural experience. The available literature on the role of digital technologies in cultural experiences tackles two different aspects that are respectively related to the potentialities offered by digital technologies to enrich the visitor experience; the impact of the adoption of digital technologies on the cultural experience itself. The first group of studies explores the potentialities offered by digital technologies to enrich the visitor experience (Light et al. 2018; Giannini and Bowen 2019). These studies emphasized the features of the technological tools. For example, Light et al. (2018) focus on how digital technologies significantly contribute to shape the museum experience both for visitors and cultural professionals and the ways they display new possibilities for museums to engage with visitors, offsite and onsite, according to the possibility for them to interact, anytime, even before people come to visit. Other studies such as Moorhouse, Tom Dieck, and Jung (2019) discuss the extent to which augmented reality can increase the interactivity and adding meaning to the museum visit. Further emphasizing the importance of digital technologies, Szabo, Zardini Lacedelli, and Pompanin (2017, 116) underline the importance to have a hybrid visit, intended as ‘a new way to explore the collections of museums and cultural heritage sites, by browsing their virtual space both onsite and off site’. Also, other studies (Galani and Kidd 2019; Gil-Fuentetaja and Economou 2019) highlight visitors can access contents and collections both onsite and offsite, using their mobile devices. The second type of study explores the impact of the adoption of digital technologies on the cultural experience itself, both with conceptual and empirical investigations. Some authors underlined the benefits of digital experiences compared with physical ones. For example, Chiwara and Chipangura (2018) argued that the online experience is not substitutive of the experience onsite, nor an alternative; but it represents a very important way for museums to get in contact with their audience, starting/continuing their dialogue with visitors and shaping visitors’ expectations. Before, Soren (2009) affirmed the online experience is fully considered as part of the cultural experience itself even though in some cases it may happen that people just have an online experience exploring museum’s collections and contents on the internet, without never come to visit (Hashemi and Kamps 2018; Galani and Kidd 2019). Some other authors such as Charitonos et al. (2012) argue that especially before and after the visit, visitors have an online experience, connecting at distance with the museum’s contents, exhibition spaces and social networks. Campos et al. (2018) add that the onsite experience is inevitably related with physical and social contexts but a significant overlapping with the digital environment is evident. Moreover, Ross et al. (2018) discuss the actual effects on the visitor experience, focusing on how much digital technology brings in terms of visitor engagement and visitor satisfaction. These available studies offer valuable contributions on the features of digital technologies, on the expected impact on visitors’ satisfaction. They focus on the visitor experience as the final outcome, taking the visitor’s experiential perspective (Antón, Camarero, and Garrido 2018). Yet, to the best of our knowledge, there are almost no specific investigations on the relationship between museums and visitors and the extent to which digital technologies can shape this relationship; also providing the museum’s perspective. This study enters this field taking into account the process and strategy adopted by the museum to design and manage the digital experience. In particular, this study leverages the concept of value co-creation to interpret the type of interactions fostered by technology. This choice is supported by the recognition that cocreation represents the interactive encounter between museum and visitors and the experience itself implies the co-creation of value (Antón, Camarero, and Garrido 2018). According to Suntikul and Jachna (2016), there is no co-created value without the experience and since the experience has a collective dimension of sharing, value is socially constructed (Rihova et al. 2015). Visitors develop a bond with the museum, intensifying the cultural experience, further participating in museums’ initiatives, and being active in the museum’s network (Campos et al. 2018).

More specifically, the Co-Creation Framework (CCF) by Ramaswamy and Ozcan (2018) is here adopted to investigate how museums design their digital experience through a value co-creation approach. According to Ramaswamy and Ozcan (2018), the value cocreation happens through interactions. It overcomes the duality between service provider and user, focusing on the system of interactions that generates the user experience, rather than on the activities. The system of interactions involves four elements. The first element is represented by artifacts, defined as ‘physical and digitalized things, including data in the form of numbers, text, pictures, audio and video’ (Ramaswamy and Ozcan 2018, 198); from a museum perspective, artifacts can be related to the museum collection. The second element is processes, as defined by the framework, can be both digitized and traditional interactions (Ramaswamy and Ozcan 2018, 198); in the case of museums, processes can be identified as the ways museum and visitors interact during the experience. The third element concerns the interfaces that ‘include physical and digitalized means by which an entity comes into interaction with another entity’ (Ramaswamy and Ozcan 2018, 198) and the fourth element is about persons. It includes all the individuals interacting on the museum experience, in their roles. The reason behind the choice of this framework is twofold. First, the framework conceptualizes value co-creation as a relational process based on an interactive experience. This conceptualization supported the analysis of how a museum interrelates different elements (i.e., artifacts, persons, processes and interfaces) in the process of designing the experience. The same conceptualization also supported a practical analysis of the relations to set when designing a digital experience. Second, the CCF makes explicit the relevance of the interaction, which is aligned with the nature of digital technologies. The CCF, which is theoretical, was used in this study to set a qualitative analysis through four different digital experiences. This study offers a novel perspective in the conceptualization of digital technologies as enablers of value co-creation in museums, bringing evidence of the museums’ perspective on value co-creation and the ways museum re-think their collaborative relationship with visitors, through digital technologies.

Methodology

The research adopts a qualitative approach to investigate how museums can rethink their relationship with visitors through digital technologies. It is based on a multiple case study (Yin 1984). The cases represent a valuable theoretical sample because of the strategic perspective that museums have on digital technologies and their relationship with visitors. The cases emerged from the results of a survey about projects’ digitalization level, which had been spread through 400 museums in Italy, by the Observatory of Digital Innovation in Arts, Heritage and Culture of Politecnico di Milano. The cases have been selected as the most recent projects in 2019 that have digital technologies at the core of the visitor experience. Also, more in general, Italian museums represent an interesting research ground: digital maturity processes are still under development and consistently with that, Italian museums represent valuable settings were to observe how museums’ managers build up their way to achieve this complex goal. More specifically, the Italian museums which have been selected are: Mart, Museum of Modern and Contemporary Art of Trento and Rovereto; Civic Museums of Vicenza – MeVe Museum, the Veneto Great War Memorial; the Leonardo’s Last Supper Museum and the Leonardo Da Vinci National Museum of Science and Technology (Table 1). These museums are different in terms of location, governance form, type of collection, but they all share the presence of a digital project intended to establish novel interactions with visitors. The features of the selected cases are further outlined in the next section.

The context of analysis 

Mart, Museum of Modern and Contemporary Art of Trento and Rovereto1 (Table 1) has developed Mart on Alexa. It is a skill for Alexa, is the Amazon vocal assistant, based on an Artificial Intelligence system; Alexa can listen, understand and elaborate complex answers to questions and requests it receives from interlocutors. It is a conversational interface that can also learn new specific skills. The museum’s objective was to bring its stories outside its walls; it wanted to literary have a conversation with its distant visitors and non-visitors, spreading its voice, till their homes. The experience starts when the user pronounces the sentence ‘Alexa, tell me about Mart!’. Alexa selects a random content, that Mart called ‘pills’, which is a short story about the museum’s collection, the museum’s architecture or the archival documents. There are 60 ‘pills’ in total, 20 for each topic (few seconds each ‘pill’). After the user listened to the ‘pill’, Alexa proposes a second interaction to the user, asking him or her to continue. In the case the user wants to hear about more stories, Alexa randomly selects the second ‘pill’ (a few seconds longer than the first one); otherwise, the user can ask Alexa all the information about the visit. The whole project has been developed in collaboration with an external technological partner. MeVe Museum2 – Veneto Great War Memorial Montebelluna (Table 1), together with the municipality of Vicenza, took part in WORTHY – World Wars Toward Heritage for Youth an educational project promoted by the Erasmus + program. An external technological provider developed a multimedia platform called WORTHY in which students can upload micro-stories transmitted by their relatives who took part in worldwide conflicts. It happens through old objects or documents they preserve at home. The project has three main objectives: to retrieve and preserve the historical memory, to strengthen intergenerational bonds and to leverage students’ passion for History throughout an interactive experience. The experience is activated by the students, who search for objects and stories at their homes, asking their relatives. Once they found something interesting, they share it with their teachers and schoolmates that support them in contextualizing the object and uploading it on the digital platform. The multimedia platform offers different tools for objects digitalization such as 3D scanners and Augmented Reality. All people can contribute, share and see each other’s stories. The Leonardo’s Last Supper Museum3 (Table 1) is a very peculiar museum, since it exhibits just two works of arts, by Leonardo Da Vinci: Montorfano and The Last Supper. Also, the two rooms are quite small and for maintenance-related issues, they need a stable temperature. Due to these conditions, visitors can have access in small groups and they have a limited time to visit (15 min per group). The Leonardo’s Last Supper Museum together with a technological partner developed an Augmented Reality Mobile App named Cenacolo Vinciano Official App, with a two-folded aim: to guide visitors during the onsite experience, making it more interactive and engaging despite the limitations, and to expand the time of its connection with visitors, including the phases before and after the visit. The experience can start before being physically at the museum; indeed, visitors can appreciate few pre-readings. When visitors enter the museum, other contents are unlocked and the Augmented Reality tour starts. Onsite, visitors can visualize additional explanatory contents, simply pointing at the works of arts with their mobile phones. After the visit, their experience can continue in the city of Milan, discovering the traces of Leonardo, following historical paths or coloring digital reproductions of the artworks, with their children. The technical and technological parts of the projects have been developed in collaboration with the external digital partner. The Leonardo Da Vinci National Museum of Science and Technology4 (Table 1) designed an Augmented Reality App named Train Stories App. The museum objective was to put on value few objects of the main collection which the museum has difficulties to promote traditionally (e.g., using panels and ordinary audio guides). The project focuses on the mobility pavilion and in particular to the Indian Mail, which is a locomotive that was used to travel from Europe to India in the nineteenth century. The experience starts and ends onsite, in the pavilion. Visitors are involved by a virtual character called Guido the Guide, who guides them through eight main spots in the pavilion, discovering the Indian Mail’s stories. Once visitors are in front of the locomotive, they can activate three contents’ sections: the trip, the interiors and how it works. The first section offers a short video experience (1 min) that shows the travels of the locomotive and its historical contextualization. In the second section, pointing at the object with their mobile phones, visitors can move into the digital reconstruction of the locomotive’s interiors. The last section presents video content in which the curator explains the mechanic of the locomotive and how it used to work.

Data collection and data analysis 

Semi-structured interviews have been used to collect data about each museum. The interviews were recorded and transcribed and from the interview text, the qualitative analysis of the interviews was led through the NVivo software (Edwards-Jones 2014) that allowed us to classify the text (Gioia, Corley, and Hamilton 2013) (Figure 1). We interviewed one museum manager (e.g., director, communication manager, digital manager) and in few cases also technological partners. Museums’ managers were informed about the project’s objectives, the project’s strategy, museum’s problems or needs, and the role of digital technologies in the project. Technological partners were informed about the technological features and possibilities of digital interfaces. The interviews were structured in five sections. Each section focused on a different element of the CCF within artifacts, processes, persons and interfaces. The fifth section addressed the project objectives and strategic aspects. Sections consisted of five questions each. The interviews generally lasted 1 h each. The main coding categories have been identified with regard to the elements of the CCF by Ramaswamy and Ozcan (2018) (Figure 1).

Results 

Three main interconnected levels emerged as distinctive aspects in the design of a digital experience: 
. the nodes; the connections and the relationships. Especially: . the nodes identify the type of the elements in interaction (i.e., artifacts, contents, interfaces, persons and processes); 
. the connections define the system of interactions among the elements and the flow of interactions which shapes the visitor experience; 
. the relationships show the way the visitor experience shapes the roles of museum and visitors. 

Digital technologies are at the core of each level, although with a different function. These levels are presented in the following sections. The combination of them characterizes the design strategy for museums to rethink their relationship with visitors, through digital technologies, adopting a bi-directional perspective.

The nodes: from the elements to the system of interactions This section refers to the importance of the type of elements in characterizing the digital co-creation of the experience. While the five elements are considered by all the museums, their nature is differently stated case by case. Accordingly, few archetypes have been highlighted for each element (Table 2). The first node is represented by contents (Table 2), which consist of stories, meanings, anecdotes, information, explanation, interpretations, conveyed by digital interfaces. They are generally related to museum’s identity, architecture and spaces, collections, curatorial documents, museum’s events, etc. With a focus on their relationship with digital interfaces, four contents subcategories have emerged: hidden contents, lost contents, nonaccessible contents, and personal contents. Hidden contents can be defined as those contents that would not be visible without the support of digital interfaces. Lost contents are related to the power of digital technology to digitally reproduce physical reality. Nonaccessible contents are those that cannot be easily directly experienced by visitors, nor clearly understood; these contents find their most accessible form in digital translations. Personal contents are identified as those contents that are those who own to visitors because they are generated by themselves. In Museum 1, is evident a particular interest toward the usage of digital interfaces to valorize non-accessible contents. Alexa, the conversational interface, tells users about archival stories which cannot be exposed and accessed onsite, nor effectively told through social media and visual languages. In this case, digital interfaces allow museums to communicate themselves through documents and stories that cannot be experienced, onsite neither, this makes visitors feeling privileged interlocutors. During an ordinary museum visit, visitors are not allowed to access the archives […] So both, the visual aspect and the direct experience of contents are in some way limited by the place and by their materiality. Museum 2 yields personal content since it calls students, their families and teachers to create a collaborative collection that is digitally integrated to the museum’s official one. All this people enrich the museum’s stories about the worldwide historical wars, sharing their family experience of it, through personal objects, on a digital platform. Collecting people personal stories, we will reconstruct which intertwining emerge between the history of the individual and that of the world conflict the individual took part to, or in which the individual was involved. Museum 3 finds in an augmented reality mobile app, the most effective way to show pieces of paintings that are not visible anymore. […] augmented reality is used to reconstruct a part of the work of art, as it was or as we think it was. In Museum 4, the augmented reality app allows visitors to discover how a historical locomotive used to work and to recall the trip it had from Europe to India. The thematic focus of the third experience is on the operation of the steam locomotive […] Here, an animation starts, showing the visitor how the locomotive used to work. The second node is represented by artifacts (Table 2), a crucial category for museums since it comprises heritage and collections. Museums mentioned paintings, works of arts in general, the exhibition spaces, but also video, audio, interactive drawings andmaps. Analyzed with a focus on digital technologies, the artifacts category includes: digital artifacts, physical artifacts and hybrid artifacts. Digital artifacts are those who are born as digital by their nature; they can just be experienced digitally. Physical artifacts can be identified with the traditional form of museums’ collections and their explanatory textual supports. They represent the ‘row material’ from which museums extract their contents but their direct interaction with digital interfaces is very limited. Hybrid artifacts are characterized by the synergy and the high integration between physical artifacts and the digital layer of the experience. In the case of Museum 1, it created ad hoc stories, to be spread digitally, in a conversation between Alexa and the user. Museum 2 shows a high interest in physical artifacts as objects owned by students’ relatives, that hide stories about the worldwide historical conflicts. Lately, the museum foster students and their teachers to digitalize the object turning them into digital reproductions that can be shared on the online platform. […] an object that belonged to a person. In both, Museum 3 and Museum 4, the interdependence among physical works, objects or spaces and digital visualizations is very strong. Especially, with regard to Museum 3, The graphic interaction allows visitors to compare the preparatory drawing (Last Supper, by Leonardo Da Vinci), with the finished work of art’s details, by moving the mobile phone over the image space. The third node is about persons (Table 2). They are often mentioned by museums as ‘our visitors’, ‘our non-visitors’; otherwise, they correspond to specific targets such as ‘families’, ‘students’, ‘teachers’, etc. Digital technologies are mostly adopted by the museums to connect with their visitors at distance or to engage non-visitors in order to bring them from the online to the onsite. In persons’ category, two subcategories are evident and they reflect the different roles people might have in the interaction and with regard to the experience: actors, intermediaries. Actors are those people, visitors or non-visitors, who have the role to activate the experience, to define their personal experience, select or generate contents. Intermediaries are those people who actively contribute, facilitate or enrich the experience of others; they can be museum’s staff people, relatives, teachers, etc. Museum 1, Museum 3 and Museum 4 focus on visitors as actors. For instance, in Museum 1, the user is the one who unlock the experience through vocal commands, interacting with the conversational interface. […] the user asks Alexa - Alexa open Mart Rovereto. In Museum 4, visitors are actors in a way they become the explorers, interacting with a virtual character that guides them toward the discovery of the artifacts onsite and hidden contents. There are small interactions in which you help the character to perform micro actions (to put the suitcase on the ground) and then he starts telling the story. Unlike other museums, in Museum 2, digital technologies enhance interactions within a varied range of subjects (e.g., relatives, students, teacher, museum’s staff people); these interactions put a value on the role of intermediaries as an enabler of experiential processes. Teachers, museum’s staff and technological partners support and encourage students to collect and tell the stories, and also to digitalize the objects to be uploaded on the online platform. […] they work with families, recovering materials and personal stories behind objects. The fourth consists of processes (Table 2) mentioned as ‘narration’, ‘explanation’, ‘discovering’, ‘sharing’, ‘connecting’, etc. They appear as the ways museums vehicle their contents and artifacts, to people. Processes category outlines as follows: talking process, exploring process, sharing process. The first one is its core in a strong storytelling approach; it regards those museums in which narratives have a central role. The exploring process fosters visitors to look for hidden contents, entering the physical and digital environment to the discovering of their experience. The sharing process activates social connections among visitors and collaborative dynamics that have the human relationship at its core. Especially, Museum 1 sets a talking process directly interacting with users, in a conversation in which We talk to each other, we give and receive information. Museum 2 aims to enable a sharing process. Students and their families share stories around personal object. Also, students, their teachers and museum’s experts share historical and curatorial knowledge. The student who finds the object discuss with the teacher about it; then an expert helps to contextualize that object within the World Wars history and eventually, students load the object onto the platform, making everyone able to reconstruct micro-stories. Both, Museum 3 and Museum 4, encourage visitors to undertake an exploration of the museum space and contents, through mobile apps. Museum 4 fosters visitors to engage with a virtual character, discovering the pavilion and the history of the Indian Mail locomotive. Few routes through Milan are also suggested and mapped. Visitors can discover other traces of Leonardo, exploring the area […] The fifth node refers to interfaces (Table 2) mentioned as specific tools such as ‘mobile app’, ‘Alexa skill’, ‘virtual reality app’ and so on with regard to technical aspects and software development issues (i.e., ‘software language’, ‘data collection system’). The technological variety of tools is not peculiar (e.g., mobile applications are diffused), rather the differences emerge relatively to the nature of needs: context-specific, visitor-specific, collection-specific and budget-oriented. Interfaces articulate into three categories: narrator, guide, collector. The narrator interface delivers a message to the visitor; the interface tells museum’s stories, becoming the museum’s voice. The guide interface provides key information and deepening. The collector interface is the one that turns the museum into a public space, in which people experience sharing and collaborative practices. Museum 1 choice is more collection-specific; indeed, a conversational interface as Alexa, represented the best way to spread archival documents that cannot be exhibited onsite, neither communicated through social media in an effective way. The digital interface becomes the voice of the museum, it turns the museum into an interactive narrator. It brings museum’s stories far in space and time, from the onsite experience, to all, visitors and non-visitors. Somehow, Alexa became the voice of the museum, the narrative voice of Mart. Museum 3 privileges context-specific solutions: physical characteristics of the museums spaces affect the usage of digital interfaces. In Museum 3, visitors had consistent constraints (i.e., 15 min experience for each visitors’ group, because of limited exhibition spaces). This issue fosters Museum 3 to adopt non-invasive technological solutions, such as augmented reality app, downloadable on visitors’ mobile phones. In both cases, digital interfaces (mobile app supporting the onsite visit) substitute and implement the role of a guide who drives visitors through the museum’s spaces and artifacts but also toward the discovery of new contents. […] accompany the visitor right within those 15 minutes visit, without disturbing the moment of intimacy and reflection in front of the work of art. Museum 2 favored visitors-specific solutions, focusing on students and teachers as main targets. The digital platform has been designed to match students’ and teachers’ needs. Training sessions with software developers, teachers and students have been also planned to guide users approaching the tools. In this case, the digital interface plays the role of collector and it generates a shared space where people and museum’s stories coexist. Everyone can find their item online and see those uploaded by others. The connections: from the system of interactions to the experience flow This section discusses the way through which the elements of co-creation are in interaction with each other and the experience flow that this system of interactions generates. The results highlight: the direct interaction of contents, artifacts, persons and processes, with the node of Interfaces; the new area of experience generated by these systems of interactions (Figure 2). Consistently with the system of interactions and the elements involved in it (Figure 2), the cases show the presence of four different experiences (Figure 3) that vary based on how the system of interaction is structured: iterative experience, magnetic experience, multilayer experience and perspective experience. Museum 1 proposes an iterative experience (Figure 3), which is characterized by the same sequence of interaction within the elements. The user activates Alexa skill (interface) through a vocal command and Alexa provides a ‘pill’ of content which is randomly selected within four topics (contents): collection, information about the visit, archive and museum architecture. After the user listens to the ‘pill’, Alexa (interface) proposes to continue exactly in the same way and sequence of interactions (content-process-interface…). As the museum’s digital manager affirmed The museum approaches the user with a curious story. Once this story is over, at that point, Alexa asks the user if he wants to hear another story or if he wants to ask for further information.

The interactions within contents, persons and processes are emphasized by the museum discussing the visitor experience in all its steps and phases. The technical consultants also expressed themselves this way: The second content proposed is a little longer and a little more in-depth. We distinguished between the initial content, which we kept a little shorter and the content related to the second iteration; it allows a bit more depth. Museum 2 designed a magnetic experience (Figure 3) which has been so called because it makes artifacts (e.g., objects from students’ families), contents (e.g., personal stories from students’ families; historical context integrated by teachers) and the digital interface (e.g., multi-tool platform to digitalize objects and their stories) became the core of social processes; the interaction on these elements makes various people interact and exchanging knowledge with each other. As it was explained by the museum director: […] (the students) through the objects they have at home that will be a bit like the pulp around which the project will develop. The project of Museum 3 displays a multilayer experience (Figure 3); the digital interface articulates three types of experiences, at the moments before, during and after the onsite visit. Before the visit, visitors can have access (interface) to few readings (contents) that foster curiosity and expectations; during the visit, augmented reality (interface) makes the dialogue with artifacts and museum’s spaces deeper and more interactive; after the visit, visitors can have more contents, they can explore the traces of Leonardo Da Vinci in the city of Milan and children can find few games (e.g., coloring drawings, puzzles) (contents). In this case, the digital interface should enable a differentiation of the experience based on three time layers of the visitor journey. Communication manager said: There is a pre-visit engagement phase with the visitor […] in the post-visit phase, itineraries and more readings are suggested. Museum 4 refers to another experience shape which we called the perspective experience (Figure 3). In this frame, the digital interface allows visitors to get different perspectives (contents) of the same artifact. The augmented reality mobile app has been applied to the main piece of the mobility pavilion, the Indian Mail locomotive. Visitors can choose which section activate; each section in the app provides visitors with different contents, different stories and different possibilities of interaction. This dynamic defines the possibility for visitors to acquire various perspectives on the same object: the historical trip, the old interiors of the locomotive and the mechanical aspects. The digital manager explained: We propose three experiences in augmented reality: the stories about this object have been divided into three thematic areas. The relationships: from the experience flow to the system of relationship This section explores the type of relationship between museums and visitors as emergent from the previous choices about how the different elements interact with each other through the digital interfaces. Depending on the type of the experience flow, we found four types of system of relationship emerged; they are based on the role of the museum and its predominant elements in interaction (Figure 4): fluid relationship, inclusive relationship, elastic relationship and introvert relationship. A fluid relational system is evident in Museum 1: the museum aims to establish a dialogue with users who had no contacts before; it is mostly an offsite type of connection. The museum wants to expand as much as possible its boundaries, escaping its physical spaces to reach visitors and non-visitors wherever they are, with a cultural experience. Museum 1 is a good example of this museum-visitors’ relational system; indeed, the conversational interface brings the voice of the museum to users’ homes. The museum does not have direct contact with the users and mostly they do not know each other. As the digital manager said So, the Alexa project was born with the ambition, let’s say, to enter the homes of these hypothetical visitors […]. The inclusive relational system is well represented by Museum 2; it takes shape when the museum becomes an activator of social relationships within various actors; this can happen onsite and offsite. Through its voice and one of the teachers, the museum invites students to look for family objects and stories that are related to the historical global wars. The museum wants to collect, preserve and valorise these stories through the digital platform, giving shape to a collaborative digital collection. This aim activates interactions within various people: the students ask their familiars for their personal stories related to the objects, then students interact with their teachers and their schoolmates to integrate the personal stories with a historical context but also teachers interact with museum’s staff and developers to support students uploading their stories and digitalizing their objects. The museum director explained: About the project’s objectives, we are interested not only make students passionate about History, but we also aim to find out what are the war experience repercussions in the families of those who took part to the conflicts. For this reason, there is also a research for hidden stories behind that specific object.

The elastic relational system corresponds to Museum 3; the museum aims to expand in time and space the visitor experience. Digital interfaces represent a mean to make their dialogue lasting even after the onsite visit to keep a connection with the visitors. As the communication manager affirmed: We send notifications to the app store, which sends notifications to all visitors’ devices. The introvert relational system takes place when the museum-visitors dialogue is strongly delimited to the onsite visit. It is the case of Museum 4, which aims to provide visitors with an unforgettable adventure in which the onsite dimension makes it acquiring a unique meaning; the onsite visit is the only time the visitor has a full experience. As the digital manager affirmed: We don’t care if visitors keep the app on the mobile phone, after the visit. We do not send push notifications, it’s just a medium to better tell our stories. The mobile app relates the augmented reality experience and all the other informative contents, to the museum’s pavilion and to a specific object which is the Indian Mail. Contents acquire their full meaning just if explored into the physical space of the museum. Discussion and conclusion The study brings evidence that museum rethinks their relationship with visitors, through digital technologies, redesigning themselves first. The adoption of digital technologies fosters museums to redesign and rethink the elements in interaction (artifacts, contents, processes, persons and interfaces), the type of experience to offer and the type of relationship with users. In particular, this study identifies three aspects of design that a museum should consider when approaching digital projects in which visitors can play an active role as co-creators: the design of the system of interactions; the design of the experience flow; the design of the expected relationship with visitors. The design of the system of interactions requires the identification of the role, the importance and the interaction among the elements (i.e., artifacts, processes, persons and contents) with regard to digital interfaces. Results show that different systems of interactions can be designed. The active role of visitors, in the system of interactions, determines the shape of the relationship within museum and visitors. In line with the literature, a significant redefinition of the elements in interaction by museums focuses on artifacts and contents, and processes. Especially, artifacts and contents represent the core elements of the traditional curatorial-oriented museum approach; indeed, they are directly related to their collections, which is the core of museums’ offer. Consistently with scholars’ contributions, the redefinition of artifacts goes toward digital hybridization (Pietroni 2019). The hybridization of artifacts, through digital technologies, fosters the artifacts displacement, enabling them to escape museums’ physical space, reaching the visitor’s home (Grincheva 2018; Pierdicca et al. 2019). The design of the expected experience flow could be of four different types (i.e., iterative, magnetic, multilayer and perspective) depending on how the elements (i.e., artifacts, processes, persons, contents and interfaces) are connected with each other. The design of the expected relationship with visitors could be classified as fluid, inclusive, elastic and introvert. It is deeply influenced by the design of the experience and the system of interactions, since they determine the dynamics of encounter between museums and visitors. While the investigated project differs in terms of the type of experience flows and expected relationships, digital technologies emerge as relational media in the way they foster museums toward humanization and personification processes in which, as highlighted by results, digital interfaces turn the museums into characters that have their voice and personality. Museums rethink their relationship with visitors through digital technologies through humanization and personification processes. Digital technologies turn museums into more interactive hybrid environments that can activate the dialogue with visitors, strengthening a bidirectional perspective of the cultural experience (Romanelli 2020). Museums’ interest shifts from providing notions and information, to sharing museums’ narratives and visitors’ personal-life stories, leveraging on digital technologies. In light of that, museums get closer to visitors experimenting new inclusive narratives; basically, shifting from a curatorial language to a more familiar and human tone of voice. This opens up new opportunities to create a more horizontal and non-judgmental relationship, fostering an inclusive form of dialogue, in which visitors might become storyteller, while the museum becomes the listener. The academic contribution of the research is twofolded. It enriches the museum management literature with the service provider perspective (i.e., cultural institutions’ managers and technological partners) on museum-visitors’ relationship by analyzing the potential of digital technologies as a strategic relational medium. The research also represents a first step toward the definition of a co-creation framework for cultural institutions. Our study also contributes to museums’ managers’ practice. Indeed, it provides museum managers with guidelines on how to design interactive experiences and the relationship with visitors through digital technologies. The research provides cultural institutions with actionable knowledge to strategically redefine the role of digital technologies, yielding relationship-driven rather than technology-driven solutions. With regard to the guidelines: ‘(i) starting from the visitor experience to redesign themselves and so starting from the type of visitor experience to be offered to amplify and redesign the value proposed by the museum; (ii) applying digital technologies to unlock certain levels of experience (e.g., bringing artifacts out of the museum’s walls like in Museum 3; amplifying the stories in places inaccessible to visitors such as the archives, as Museum 1 did; connecting people supplementing generational divides, such as Museum 2 designed); (iii) approaching digital technologies not just as an experiential tool rather as an additional relational medium to involve and connect with visitors beyond museum’s collections which are usually considered the main characterizing element.’ With regard to actionable knowledge, the study provides museums with an approach and a method for evaluating and implementing their digital strategy. In detail, by identifying the type of nodes in their project and the interactions within them, museums can evaluate both the initial set-up and the evolution of their digital strategy. Also, the application of the CCF allows a comparison between digital projects in the museum field. This aspect could be of interest to the policymakers of the cultural field. This research of course has some limitations that encourage future studies and further developments. First, the study focuses on the institutional perspective; it would be interesting to integrate it with the visitor viewpoint, on the same cases. Second, the study finds its empirical ground in museums, but it would be interesting to apply the analysis to a heterogeneous sample of cultural institutions. Third, the current research focuses on Italian museums and this affects the external validity of results. In this direction, the inclusion of international cases might represent a meaningful option for a future study.