Places of Memory

It’s a great pleasure to be here, and especially to have the feeling of being in the midst of such extraordinary projects, to be surrounded by their air, as James might say. I’m thinking of the Letters and the Edition and all the persons here present working on them; and I already understand, thanks to Greg Zacharias’s talk last night, a sentence in A Small Boy and Others that had been puzzling me quite a bit. In the light of James’s Liberal sympathies, it makes perfect sense, and it also matches, more closely than I at first could see, certain French portraits of the period—I’m thinking of Charles Peguy’s sense of the ancient regime lasting to the first days of the Second Empire only to succumb to a ghastly modernity through the cultural flaws and follies of that Empire. Here is what James says: “The Second Empire . . . was (for my notified consciousness) new and queer and perhaps even wrong, but on the spot so amply radiant and elegant that it took to itself, took under its protection with a splendour of insolence, the state and ancientry of the whole scene” (SB 275). For James the Liberal this modernity would not be as ghastly as it was for the Catholic radical Peguy, but “new and queer and perhaps even wrong” shrewdly catches a whole political order. Of course it’s a bit daunting to be in the company of so many genuine Jamesians— it’s always daunting to be reminded of one’s own ignorance—but I have to say that even that fact is not seriously getting in the way of my pleasure. I’d like to begin with an epigraph, or let’s say a fable, taken from yesterday’s reception at the Reform Club. You remember we were told we couldn’t just wander around the place looking at things or for things and we couldn’t see Henry James’s room because no one knew which room it was—or rather which room it was depended on who was the Secretary of the Club at the time. My suggestion is that this sensible view represents a radical misunderstanding both of history and of Henry James: if we had been shown a room, any room, it would have been James’s room if the Secretary had said it was. This is not a deeply skeptical or recklessly relativist view. It’s not that James didn’t occupy one room or another, or that under certain circumstances it wouldn’t matter which room it was. It’s that for the purposes of what James calls “the visiting mind” (SB 24), any authorized room would do, and an unauthorized room, even the right one, would not. That same mind, according to James, would be devoted to “the lively interest of the view, and above all of the measure, of almost any mental history after the fact” (SB 176). “Almost any.” I can’t gauge the reservation represented by these two words—for much the same reason as I don’t quite understand the force of the word “measure” in the above sentence: “the lively interest of the view, and above all of the measure, of almost any mental history after the fact.” What is clear is that we are looking at a defense of what Peter Collister, in his admirable critical edition of A Small Boy and Others, calls a “pointedly revisionary construction of mimesis” (xiii). There is a represented world—it’s slightly surprising to think of how many facts appear in James’s autobiographies and indeed how often he uses the word “fact” (100 times in A Small Boy alone, according to my computer)—but it is represented. And revised. And pointedly so. Yet, apart from occasional excursions into theory and justification, this is not what James seems to say or think he is doing. Long ago, F. W. Dupee wrote that James writes his autobiography as if his present self were continuous with his past self. He tries to combine immediacy of impression with maturity of judgment and so to remain faithful to the reality of his experience in something like its entirety. (AU xiv) Read swiftly, these lines represent an old, relatively easy view of James’s project. But with thoughts of the unvisitable room in mind, I find myself pausing over the phrase “as if” and the verb “tries.” Much space for reflection in such expressions, if one is disposed to reflect, and I hope you’ll forgive me—Dupee was a cherished friend and colleague of mine—for recalling a brilliant passage about “as if” in Dupee’s book on James: The quality of nightmare enters James’s story [“The Beast in the Jungle”] principally by way of his metaphors. The Beast of Marcher’s fate is a figurative beast; Marcher’s search for his past is a figurative search: “The lost stuff of his consciousness became thus for him as a strayed or stolen child to an unappeasable father; he hunted it up and down very much as if he were knocking at doors or enquiring of the police.” Among the writers of Joyce’s and Kafka’s generation the “as if” becomes “is”; the beast springs to life and devours us, the police materialize and knock at our doors with a summons to the all-justifying courts, the strayed children and unappeasable fathers hunt one another up and down the streets of tangible cities. (Henry James 158) I will add, as my own little riff on this insight, that in Proust the picture of the act of remembering as being like a person waking up in a strange room becomes, between early and later versions of his novel, a person waking up in a strange room launching a vast novel about memory. “The literal played in our education as small a part as it perhaps ever played in any,” James wrote, and I’m sure he was right (SB 174). But literalizing, making literal, is another thing, almost the name of every game for an imaginative writer. Even to the point of not quite knowing where the figurative starts or ends. When I began to think about place in James, about what a place was for James, and what he meant by placing things and people, the phrase “places of memory” appeared in my mind. I was borrowing it from the French historian Pierre Nora, inventor and general editor of a vast work called Les Lieux de mémoire, subtitled Les Frances, “Frances” (1984–1992). Here is what Nora says about the concept: “It was a matter of bringing to light the secret relationship that obtained between real memorials like monuments to the dead or the Pantheon and objects apparently as different as museums, commemorations, archives, devices or emblems” (7). Nora also mentions “institutions . . . realities like frontiers . . . administrative, political or temporal categories.” “These places,” he says, “had to be understood in all senses of the word, from the most material and concrete . . . to the most abstract and intellectually constructed” (15, my translation).1 Among the many chapters of the books are entries on the café, proverbs, histories of the French language, the terms right and left, the ritual visit to the great writer, Larousse’s dictionary, A la recherche du temps perdu, much, much more. We might think that such a concept excludes nothing—and it is perhaps a bit disconcerting even for the open, not to say sloppy, mind to think of places that are also times and words and even books. But of course the capaciousness of the project is its attraction, and no sooner does one begin to describe it than it seems less like a help to understanding Henry James than a duplication of James’s own project—as if he had invented his own version of the Annales school of history. A school of fiction that was in its way a school of history. A school of history that would deliberately lose track of the instances where fiction entered it. This is not necessarily a comfortable place—of memory or for memory—and it’s worth pausing over the occasion as well as the content of the autobiographies. The best way of pausing is to read Michael Anesko’s new book Monopolizing the Master, and in the hypertext version of this talk we could all stop and do that now. Short of that, let me quote one paragraph, which itself quotes Tamara Follini, so the conversation happily widens still further. The question has to do with Henry James’s rewriting of William James’s letters, but we can extend it to the whole issue of a supposed introduction to William’s letters devolving into a long account of Henry’s life, in which his brother is initially, at least, demoted to the status of an engaging but a rapidly appearing and disappearing “other.” In a letter now lost, James’s nephew Harry protests about the rewriting, and James replies with a letter of twenty-eight pages, which in Tamara’s words is “less a record . . . of unquestioned confidence and belief in his method than an anguished epistle of self-justification in which certainty coexists with doubt and defiance consorts with humble self-reproach” (qtd. in Anesko 33). Here is what Anesko says about what he rightly calls an “astonishing document”: On the one hand, James insisted that the claims of artistic license necessarily trumped the drudgery of mere facts; on the other hand, he came very close to admitting that he was ashamed of having indulged that license too freely. James even went so far as to suggest that . . . as he was writing, William’s spirit had hovered at his elbow, imploring him not to “give me away, to hand me over, in my raggedness & my poor accidents, quite unhelped & unfriended.” Nevertheless, the writer also had to admit that “strange withal is the ‘irony of fate’ that has made the very intensity of my tenderness on your Dad’s behalf a stumbling-block & an offense—for the sad thing is I think you’re right in being offended.” (33) We don’t have to doubt the intensity or the tenderness, but we do need to recognize the line James has crossed using them as his moral protection, and, with this sort of cue in mind, dozens of passages in the Autobiographies can be seen to signal a scruple that is made to vanish almost as soon as, if not before, it appears. In this example and in others, I am going to concentrate on A Small Boy and Others, since that is the work I have recently been reading most carefully. Listen to this delicate, even tender note, for example: I feel that at such a rate I remember too much, and yet this mild apparitionism is only part of it. To look back at all is to meet the apparitional and to find in its ghostly face the silent stare of an appeal. When I fix it, the hovering shade, whether of person or place, it fixes me back and seems the less lost—not to my consciousness, for that is nothing, but to its own—by my stopping however idly for it. (SB 78) Now the hovering shade, even of a place, is comparatively unhelped and unfriended until James rescues it. The faint accusation of remembering too much triggers the plausible but slightly too convenient claim to be engaging in an act of salvage. At another point in A Small Boy James wonders briefly not whether he is remembering too much but making too much of what he remembers. Again, he is not really worrying, just registering what he feels ought to be a worry, and what’s most interesting about his answer to his own question is not so much its content as its extravagant emphasis. He says he is “divided between” the “still present freshness” of his memories and his “sense of perhaps making too much of these tiny particles of history” (23). He continues: My stronger rule, however, I confess, and the one by which I must here consistently be guided, is that, from the moment it is a question of projecting a picture, no particle that counts for memory or is appreciable to the spirit can be too tiny. . . . (23) Not only is he not wrong; on this or any other similar occasion, he couldn’t be wrong. Well, only if projecting a picture is wrong. In a beautifully contorted reiteration of this accusation and defense—and of the figure of the particle—he says memories “break in upon me and refuse to be slighted; reconstituting as I practically am the history of my fostered imagination, for whatever it may be worth, I won’t pretend to a disrespect for any contributive particle” (96–97). Actually this textual moment is not only a reiteration—and it does, perhaps, more than the earlier instances, dramatize the concern that James is otherwise so efficiently dispatching—we could think of it as a discreet, even secretive version of his admission to Harry that an offense had been committed. Well, at least he talks energetically about not committing one. He doesn’t remember, the memories break in on him, and to reject them—or in this case not to write about them—would be not to make a selection or consider principles or tact or truth or proportion but to slight them. In fact, he couldn’t slight them even if he wanted to because they peremptorily reject such treatment: they “refuse to be slighted.” “I won’t pretend to a disrespect” is quite marvelous. It’s as if we, or some strict disciplinarian editor, were asking him to be rude to his past and his family. It’s a fine stance. But the current running through these phrases and this personification of memory is surely deeply troubled, and we need to look back at the line “reconstituting as I practically am the history of my fostered imagination.” Practically: more or less, and in practice. Fostered: by everything in my history (that is why I can leave nothing out); by myself, by this act of writing, which is a way of fostering the history of the imagination which is my life. That small boy is simultaneously myself as I was, then, long ago, and the person who could not fail to become the person I now am. James was fond of this mode of thought, as we heard yesterday when Greg read from a letter saying that James “had always meant” to live in London. Statements of this type are not necessarily true, but they are necessarily incontestable since they comfortably include and refute all earlier statements on the same subject. “I want to live in Paris,” said at one moment becomes at another “I thought I wanted to live in Paris, but. . . .” In A Small Boy James identifies himself in the early pages as (having always been) one of “those whose faculty for application is all and only in their imagination and their sensibility” (13). And in the sentence I have already quoted from, James suggests that his parents knew they didn’t have to worry about his wandering off and getting into trouble because they had very soon guessed “that the only form of riot or revel ever known to me would be that of the visiting mind” (24). But of course in all these sentences the absent occasions or effects, the riot or revel, disrespect, slight, do make their appearance and won’t go away. They are banished, so to speak, only to return on every rereading. Socrates’ complaint about writing—that it keeps saying the same thing—becomes the chance of a continuing if almost silenced record of conscience. The riot or revel will never appear in James’s life—never would and never could. And the slight and disrespect are unintentional, or lateral, side effects of a writing project that takes precedence over everything. But they are verbally persistent. There is surely pathos as well as pride in the following famous confession. James is on the second page of his book (in Collister’s edition), and already he is answering an invisible authority asking him to make some decisions. He refuses to choose and says he has no choice. Here the slight and disrespect of the other passage are called “a cold impiety”: I think I shall be ashamed, as of a cold impiety, to find any element altogether negligible. To which I may add perhaps that I struggle under the drawback, innate and inbred, of seeing the whole content of memory and affection in each enacted and recovered moment, as who should say, in the vivid image and the very scene; the light of the only terms in which life has treated me to experience. (5–6) “Life has treated me” is the passive version of “I always meant.” No arguing with it. Not now, at least. And of course there is an even more invisible authority at work here, the writer who is making all kinds of choices and doubtless befriending and helping his old self as he couldn’t resist befriending and helping William’s shade. We might think of the moment when he writes of encouraging lapses or the lapse he chooses to end his book on. I confess myself embarrassed by my very ease of re-capture of my young consciousness; so that I perforce try to encourage lapses and keep my abundance down. The place for the lapse consents with difficulty, however, to be any particular point of the past at which I catch myself (easily caught as I am) looking about me. . . . (216) It’s easy to be caught and hard to lapse from the catching. But in spite of this confession of ease and difficulty, James is managing choices all the time. As in: “I fell into a lapse of consciousness that I shall conveniently here treat as a considerable gap” (330). What James is refusing, it turns out, is to give an account of his method—not because he needs the freedom to include everything—he’s an old literary hand, he understands arguments about space—but because he needs the freedom to consider everything for inclusion. “I have lost nothing of what I saw” doesn’t mean “I have written up everything I have seen.” The consideration is careful and precise, even the result of a method. But it is the opposite of what James takes people to mean when they talk about method. “Method certainly never quite raged among us,” he says of his family and his education (175). “[Q]uite” is perfect, turns understatement into some sort of upsidedown hyperbole. And again, James imagines some horribly reasonable “other” person nagging him, someone unsympathetic to “the queer educative air” James has “been trying to breathe again.” “For think,” this person says, of all the things that the failure of method, of which you make so light, didn’t put into yours [your consciousness]; think of the splendid economy of a real—or at least of a planned and attempted education, a “regular course of instruction”—and then think of the waste involved in the so inferior substitute of which the pair of you were evidently victims. James’s nifty answer is that there can’t really be any waste if his and William’s consciousnesses are so full—“as would seem to be the case” (176). This claim seems to me not only incontestable but true but it does share the circular triumphant logic of the other propositions we have been looking at. The point is not what might have happened but what did: and what did happen can now be seen as having had to happen because it did. A combination of pragmatism and fatalism, enabled by a “pointedly revisionary” imagination (xiii). Strange result for one who says that What happened all the while . . . was that I imagined things—and as if quite on system—wholly other than as they were, and so carried on in the midst of the actual ones an existence that somehow floated and saved me even while cutting me off from any degree of direct performance, in fact from any degree of direct participation, at all. (158) The mind spins a bit here. James’s theory of his own life is confirmed by his insertion of it into every moment of his past, and the confirmation is upheld by the fact that the life he has lived is the life he has lived—or perhaps not quite lived. And again we meet the pathos and the pride in the divorce from “direct performance,” as we did with the sense of image and scene as “the only terms in which life has treated me to experience.” When James returns to the question of method, in what Collister nicely calls “perhaps one of the most positive expressions of HJ’s haphazard education” (SB 281n), he uses the same sort of so-there logic, but more playfully: If we had been little asses, I seem to have reasoned, a higher intention driving us wouldn’t have made us less so—to any point worth mentioning; and as we extracted such impressions, to put it at the worst, from redemptive accidents (to call Louvres and Luxembourgs nothing better) why we weren’t little asses, but something wholly other: which appeared all I needed to contend for. (281) One of the key places of memory in A Small Boy and Others is a person: Henry Wyckoff, James’s mother’s cousin. With your permission, I’m going to linger a bit over this well-known story, because it caught my attention on my most recent reading of the book in a way it hadn’t before. James himself says the story is “very extraordinary, of all the stories I know is I think the most beautiful—so far at least as he was concerned!” (126). “He” being Wyckoff. Wyckoff, born 1815 or 1816, died 1890—I take these details from Collister’s edition—is described as “odd” and “simple-minded,” and the “more or less legal ward” of his sister Helen (119). The problem he represents, or the problem by which he is represented, is that he is “not to be trusted”—a wonderful idiom that says all kinds of things without saying too much. A longish quotation now, because I just can’t see where to cut it: He wasn’t to be trusted—it was the sole very definite fact about him except the fact that he had so kindly come down from the far-off Beaverkill to regale us with the perfect demonstration, dutifully, resignedly setting himself among us to point the whole moral himself. He appeared, from the moment we really took it in, to be doing, in the matter, no more than he ought; he exposed himself to our invidious gaze, on this ground, with a humility, a quiet courtesy and an instinctive dignity that come back to me as simply heroic. He had himself accepted, under strenuous suggestion, the dreadful view, and I see him to-day, in the light of the grand dénouement, deferred for long years, but fairly dazzling when it came, as fairly sublime in his decision not to put anyone in the wrong about him a day sooner than he could possibly help. The whole circle of us would in that event be so dreadfully “sold,” as to our wisdom and justice, he proving only noble and exquisite. It didn’t so immensely matter to him as that, the establishment of his true character didn’t; so he went on as if for all the years—and they really piled themselves up: his passing for a dangerous idiot, or at least for a slave of his passions from the moment he was allowed the wherewithal in the least to indulge them, was a less evil for him than seeing us rudely corrected. It was in truth an extraordinary situation and would have offered a splendid subject, as we used to say, to the painter of character, the novelist or the dramatist, with the hand to treat it. (120) James decides it has offered a splendid subject to a splendid novelist, namely Dickens, and that Mr. Dick in David Copperfield is a version or fictional relative of Henry Wyckoff. How can it be that it is only at this moment, under James’s influence, that I recognize the presence of Dick’s name in Dickens, the conjuring of the character’s name from the author’s? Collister also refers us to a notebook entry for 1891 and quotes a brisk description of the cousin by William James, who also registers an “irreproachable correctness and essential goodness” but then mentions deafness and “dense obstinacy” as well, comparing his relative to a tortoise (120n). James develops the David Copperfield comparison at some length, exploring similarities and differences. He tells us that this rich man was allowed ten cents a day to “indulge his passions . . . while his fortune . . . rolled up and became large” (121). Then his sister dies, and he becomes the charge of his aunt—and comes into his own fortune. This—or the immediate consequence—is the “dazzling dénouement” James writes of (122). The man who was not to be trusted turned out to be same in wealth as in parsimony, and the only passions he indulged were entirely respectable, indeed scarcely passions at all. Another longish quote: We became aware, not without embarrassment, that poor Henry at large and supplied with funds was exactly as harmless and blameless as poor Henry stinted and captive; as to which if anything had been wanting to our confusion or to his own dignity it would have been his supreme abstinence, his suppression of the least “Didn’t I tell you?” He didn’t even pretend to have told us, when he so abundantly might, and nothing could exceed the grace with which he appeared to have noticed nothing. He “handled” dollars as decently, and just as profusely, as he had handled dimes; the only light shade on the scene—except of course for its being so belated, which did make it pathetically dim—was the question of how nearly he at all measured his resources. Not his heart, but his imagination, in the long years, had been starved; and though he was now all discreetly and wisely encouraged to feel rich, it was rather sadly visible that, thanks to almost half a century of over-discipline, he failed quite to rise to his estate. He did feel rich, just as he felt generous; the misfortune was only in his weak sense for meanings. That, with the whole situation, made delicacy of the first importance; as indeed what was perhaps most striking in the entire connection was the part played by delicacy from the first. It had all been a drama of the delicate: the consummately scrupulous and successful administration of his resources for the benefit of his virtue, so that they could be handed over, in the event, without the leakage of a fraction, what was that but a triumph of delicacy? So delicacy conspired, delicacy surrounded him; the case having been from the early time that, could he only be regarded as sufficiently responsible, could the sources of his bounty be judged fairly open to light pressure (there was question of none but the lightest) that bounty might blessedly flow. . . . (122–23) There is a wonderful Catch-22 element in this situation. As long as Henry is not allowed to do anything, he will one day be able to do something. And when he is allowed to do something, it is too late for the perhaps imaginary wildness that had led to his constrained life, but not too late, in James’s view, for him to behave perfectly in the later as in the earlier situation. Is this perfection a proof that Helen and the whole family were just wrong about him, or a stoic and courtly adaptation to a general view? At any rate: Our admirable aunt, not less devoted and less disinterested than his former protectress, had yet much more imagination; she had enough, in a word, for perfect confidence, and under confidence what remained of poor Henry’s life bloomed like a garden freshly watered. Sad alas the fact that so scant a patch was now left. It sufficed, however, and he rose, just in time, to every conception; it was, as I have already noted, as if he had all the while known, as if he had really been a conscious victim to the superstition of his blackness . . . his long inward loneliness, of half a century, did. He had bowed his head and sometimes softly scratched it during that immense period; he had occasionally, after roaming downstairs with the troubled fold in his brow and the difficult, the smothered statement on his lips (his vocabulary was scant and stiff, the vocabulary of pleading explanation, often found too complicated by the witty,) retired once more to his room sometimes indeed for hours, to think it all over again; but had never failed of sobriety or propriety or punctuality or regularity, never failed of one of the virtues his imputed indifference to which had been the ground of his discipline. It was very extraordinary, and of all the stories I know is I think the most beautiful—so far at least as he was concerned! (125–26) Do we find the story as beautiful as James does? I certainly find it beautifully Jamesian. But its shifting contents and implications are very strange—not just ambiguous but contradictory. Is this a story about American innocence, suggesting that all evil is in the suspicious mind and not in the kindly heart? Or just about lateness? When Henry had the chance to go wild he didn’t know how to. There is also the curious sense, reminiscent of other moments in later James, that money alone enables the imagination, and that nothing at all can be done without it. It might be the root of all evil, but it is certainly the root of all action in the world, all passion and blossoming. James often seems to think this, as well as its exact opposite, so this tension becomes part of the fascination of the story. I don’t want to go too far in identifying Henry James with Henry Wyckoff, although not to go some way would be not to read the book. But certainly part of the feeling I get from the story and its telling—not exactly one of beauty but certainly of a dignified sadness and serene acceptance of waste—is clearly related to James’s own sense of someone who could be trusted—alas. Well, not quite alas. James is not regretting his mode of life of the absence of riot and revel, but he is measuring the gap between riot and inaction, and he is pondering the back-handed compliment of trust. To believe that people think you can’t get into trouble, that you could be trusted with unlimited amounts of loot and not know how to misspend it is itself a subtle kind of trouble. This is the trouble that Henry Wyckoff was spared—as he was spared almost everything—and that Henry James managed to turn into a gift. A Small Boy and Others is among other things the tale of that turning, as well as an insecure proof that the writer had no other options. This place of memory, then, tells us a lot about other places and by implication about many of James’s choices among all the places and moments and people he couldn’t choose among. We might think again of Pierre Nora’s “secret relationship” between actual monuments to the dead and other ways of commemorating them (7). There are plenty of real places in A Small Boy and plenty of history in the ordinary sense. Too much even at times. When he was not quite the Londoner he became in Greg’s talk yesterday—or when that Londoner recalled his early experiences of London— he evoked Bill Sykes and Nancy in Cruikshank’s versions of the London poor, only to replace them with “bigger brutality of life” in the form “of a woman reeling backward as a man felled her to the ground with a blow in the face” (SB 241). He confesses his liking for history—“I liked for my own part a lot of history”—but also says he feels that “one didn’t quite want so inordinate a quantity.” And so fast has he moved over the ground that the history he doesn’t want so much of is no longer that of urban violence but of old-fashioned national snobbery and groveling: “certain queer old obsequiosities and appeals, whinings and sidlings and hand-rubbings and curtsey-droppings, the general play of apology and humility, behind which the great dim social complexity seemed to mass itself. . . .” There are worse things than brutality, as James knew and the speed of his transition suggests. He really was a Liberal. But this solid reality—there is always plenty of solid reality in James, however cloudy the perspective may at first look—only counts as and when it is interpreted, and that was the tiny point of my fable about the room at the Reform Club. “Mental history after the fact” (176)—what a wonderful phrase, not only for biography but for almost any form of self-knowledge or knowledge of the world. It’s intriguing too that James contrasts this form of history with its logical opposite: he writes not with or in or at or of the fact but before—“that sight of the mind before— before the demonstration of the fact, that is, and while still muffled in theories and presumptions.” Hindsight is better than guessing, especially when you give yourself the freedom to rearrange what you have seen. We have seen this form of argument before in this talk; indeed, we may have seen nothing else. But it doesn’t lose sight of the fact or the facts; it rather takes them for granted. I’m sure we could settle the question of which room James lived in at the Reform Club if we needed to—I think it likely that the matter has actually been settled—and this would not be, or is not, a negligible achievement. But it would be risky to ignore the after-the-fact history of uncertainty. We not only need to know things; we need to know what to do with our knowledge and its abeyances. In this context it may be useful to recall Bertrand Russell’s famous reply to the young Wittgenstein who asked the older man to tell him whether he, Wittgenstein, was a wise man or a fool. “Wittgenstein,” Russell said, “why do you want to know?”