
Discourse Analysis Author(s): Zellig S. Harris Source: Language , Jan. - Mar., 1952, Vol. 28, No. 1 (Jan. - Mar., 1952), pp. 1-30 Published by: Linguistic Society of America 
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/409987 
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at https://about.jstor.org/terms 

is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Language 
This content downloaded from 201.245.224.239 on Thu, 20 Jan 2022 16:15:38 UTC 
 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 

DISCOURSE ANALYSIS 
ZELLIG S. HARRIS University of Pennsylvania 
This paper presents a method for the analysis of connected speech (or writing).' The method is formal, depending only on the occurrence of morphemes as dis- tinguishable elements; it does not depend upon the analyst's knowledge of the particular meaning of each morpheme. By the same token, the method does not give us any new information about the individual morphemic meanings that are being communicated in the discourse under investigation. But the fact that such new information is not obtained does not mean that we can discover nothing about the discourse but how the grammar of the language is exemplified within it. For even though we use formal procedures akin to those of descriptive linguistics, we can obtain new information about the particular text we are studying, in- formation that goes beyond descriptive linguistics. 
This additional information results from one basic fact: the analysis of the occurrence of elements in the text is applied only in respect to that text alone- that is, in respect to the other elements in the same text, and not in respect to anything else in the language. As a result of this, we discover the particular interrelations of the morphemes of the text as they occur in that one text; and in so doing we discover something of the structure of the text, of what is being done in it. We may not know just WHAT a text is saying, but we can discover HOW it is saying-what are the patterns of recurrence of its chief morphemes. 
Definite patterns may be discovered for particular texts, or for particular persons, styles, or subject-matters. In some cases, formal conclusions can be drawn from the particular pattern of morpheme distribution in a text. And often it is possible to show consistent differences of structure between the discourses of different persons, or in different styles, or about different subject-matters. 
1. PRELIMINARIES 
1.1. The Problem. One can approach discourse analysis from two types of prob- lem, which turn out to be related. The first is the problem of continuing descrip- tive linguistics beyond the limits of a single sentence at a time. The other is the question of correlating 'culture' and language (i.e. non-linguistic and linguistic behavior). 
The first problem arises because descriptive linguistics generally stops at sentence boundaries. This is not due to any prior decision. The techniques of linguistics were constructed to study any stretch of speech, of whatever length. But in every language it turns out that almost all the results lie within a rela- 
It is a pleasure to acknowledge here the cooperation of three men who have collaborated with me in developing the method and in analyzing various texts: Fred Lukoff, Noam Chomsky, and A. F. Brown. Earlier investigations in the direction of this method have been presented by Lukoff, Preliminary analysis of the linguistic structure of extended discourse, University of Pennsylvania Library (1948). A detailed analysis of a sample text will appear in a future number of LANGUAGE. 
I 
This content downloaded from 201.245.224.239 on Thu, 20 Jan 2022 16:15:38 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 

2 LANGUAGE, VOLUME 28, NUMBER 1 
tively short stretch, which we may call a sentence. That is, whe restriction on the occurrence of element A in respect to the occurr B, it will almost always be the case that A and B are regarded as occ the same sentence. Of English adjectives, for instance, we can occur before a noun or after certain verbs (in the same sentence): t the future seems bright; only rarely can we state restrictions boundaries, e.g. that if the main verb of one sentence has a given te main verb of the next sentence will have a particular other tense-su not say that if one sentence has the form NV, the next senten form N. We can only say that most sentences are NV, some ar and that these structures occur in various sequences. 
In this way descriptive linguistics, which sets out to describe of elements in any stretch of speech, ends up by describing it prim 
to other elements of the same sentence. This limitation has not seemed too serious, because it has not precluded the writing of adequate grammars: th grammar states the sentence structure; the speaker makes up a particular sen tence in keeping with this structure, and supplies the particular sequence of s 
tences. The other problem, that of the connection between behavior (or social situa- 
tion) and language, has always been considered beyond the scope of linguistics proper. Descriptive linguistics has not dealt with the meanings of morphemes; and though one might try to get around that by speaking not of meanings, but of the social and interpersonal situation in which speech occurs, descriptive linguistics has had no equipment for taking the social situation into account: it has only been able to state the occurrence of one linguistic element in respect to the occurrence of others. Culture-and-language studies have therefore been carried on without benefit of the recent distributional investigations of linguistics. For example, they list the meanings expressed in the language by surveying the vocabulary stock; or they draw conclusions from the fact that in a particular language a particular set of meanings is expressed by the same morpheme; or they discuss the nuances of meaning and usage of one word in comparison with others (e.g. in stylistics). Culture-and-language studies have also noted such points as that phrases are to be taken in their total meaning rather than as the sum of the meanings of their component morphemes, e.g. that How are you is a greeting rather than a question about health-an example that illustrates the correlation of speech with social situation. Similarly, personality characteristics in speech have been studied by correlating an individual's recurrent speech features with recurrent features of his behavior and feeling.2 
1.2. Distribution within discourse. Distributional or combinatorial analysis within one discourse at a time turns out to be relevant to both of these problems. On the one hand, it carries us past the sentence limitation of descriptive 
2Correlations between personality and language are here taken to be not merely related to correlations between 'culture' and language, but actually a special case of these. The reason for this view is that most individual textual characteristics (as distinguished from phonetic characteristics) correlate with those personality features which arise out of the individual's experience with socially conditioned interpersonal situations. 
This content downloaded from 201.245.224.239 on Thu, 20 Jan 2022 16:15:38 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 

ZELLIG S. HARRIS: DISCOURSE ANALYSIS 3 
linguistics. Although we cannot state the distribution of se any inter-sentence relation) when we are given an arbi sentences in a language, we can get quite definite result across sentence boundaries when we consider just the s connected discourse-that is, the sentences spoken or w one or more persons in a single situation. This restricti does not detract from the usefulness of the analysis, rences are internally connected. Language does not oc sentences, but in connected discourse-from a one-wor volume work, from a monolog to a Union Square argum erations of sentences are indeed of no interest except a description; and it is not surprising that we cannot fin the sentences of such an aggregate. The successive sent course, however, offer fertile soil for the methods of desc these methods study the relative distribution of elem stretch of speech. 
On the other hand, distributional analysis within one dis information about certain correlations of language wi reason is that each connected discourse occurs within whether of a person speaking, or of a conversation, or occasionally over a period of months to write a particul ticular literary or scientific tradition. To be sure, this con tion and discourse does not mean that discourses occur must necessarily have certain formal characteristics in occurring in different situations must have certain for currence between situation and discourse only makes it sible, that such formal correlations should exist. 
It remains to be shown as a matter of empirical fact t 
tions do indeed exist, that the discourses of a particu 
style, or subject-matter exhibit not only particular me 
of morphemes) but also characteristic formal features. 
of morphemes cannot be considered here. But the for 
courses can be studied by distributional methods withi 
of their correlation with a particular type of situation the occurrence of these formal features. 
1.3. Conjunction with grammar. The method presented here is thus seen to 
grow out of an application of the distributional methods of linguistics to one 
discourse at a time. It can be applied directly to a text, without using any 
linguistic knowledge about the text except the morpheme boundaries. This is 
possible because distributional analysis is an elementary method, and involves 
merely the statement of the relative occurrence of elements, in this case mor- 
phemes. To establish the method for its own sake, or for possible application to 
non-linguistic material, no prior knowledge should be used except the boundaries of the elements. 
However, when we are interested not in the method alone but in its results, when we want to use the method in order to find out all that we can about a 
This content downloaded from 201.245.224.239 on Thu, 20 Jan 2022 16:15:38 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 

4 LANGUAGE, VOLUME 28, NUMBER 1 
particular text, then it is useful to combine this method with 
guistics. To this end we would use only those statements of th 
language which are true for any sentence of a given form. For exa 
English sentence of the form N1VN2 (e.g. The boss fired Jim), 
tence with the noun phrases in the reverse order N2-N1 (Jim 
changing the suffixes around the verb : Jim was fired by the bos 
for using such grammatical information in the analysis of a te 
is applicable to any N1VN2 sentence in English it must also be 
NIVN2 sentence in the particular text before us, provided on written in English. The desirability of using such information 
cases it makes possible further applications of the discourse-an How this happens will appear in ?2.33; but it should be said h of grammatical information does not replace work that could 
discourse-analysis method, nor does it alter the independence 
It merely transforms certain sentences of the text into grammati 
sentences (as NIVN2 above was transformed into N2V*N1), in the application of the discourse-analysis method becomes mor that it becomes possible in particular sections of the text wher sible to apply it before. And it will be seen that the decision w apply these grammatical transformations need not be arbitrar termined by the structure of the text itself. 
The applicability of the discourse-analysis method in particu further increased if we not only use the ordinary results of g extend descriptive linguistics to deal with the special distribut morphemes. There are cases, as will be seen in ?2.33 below, wh to use information not about all the morphemes of some class formability of V into V*) but about a particular member of restriction of occurrence which is true for that one morphem others of its class. Such information is not in general available be obtained by methods which are basically those of descriptiv 
Finally, the applicability of discourse analysis in particular texts be increased if we draw our information not only from the gramm 
guage but also from a descriptive analysis of the body of spee which our text is a part. This larger body of material may be l dialect within which the text was spoken or written, and we that any distributional statement which is true for all sentences o in that dialect will also hold for any sentence of that form i 
consideration. 
2. THE METHOD 
2.0. The nature of the method. We have raised two problems: that of the dis tributional relations among sentences, and that of the correlation betwee language and social situation. We have proposed that information relevant to 
s When the verb is transformed to suit such an inversion of subject (N1 above) and object (N2), we may call the new verb form the conjugate of the original form, and write it V*. Then an active verb has a passive verb as its conjugate, and a passive verb has an active verb as its conjugate. 
This content downloaded from 201.245.224.239 on Thu, 20 Jan 2022 16:15:38 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 

ZELLIG S. HARRIS: DISCOURSE ANALYSIS 5 
both of these problems can be obtained by a formal analys discourse at a time. What KIND of analysis would be applic this, we consider what is permitted by the material. 
Since the material is simply a string of linguistic forms arra sentences, any formal analysis is limited to locating lingui these sentences-that is, to stating the occurrence of elem up any method for investigating the nature or compositio or their correlations with non-linguistic features, unless we b 
tion from outside. Furthermore, there are no particular elements, say but or I or communism, 
which have a prior importance, such as would cause us to be interested in the mere fact of their presence or absence in our text. Any analysis which aimed to find out whether certain particular words, selected by the investigator, occur in the text or not, would be an investigation of the CONTENT Of the text and would 
be ultimately based on the MEANINGS of the words selected. If we do not depend upon meaning in our investigation, then the only morphemes or classes which we can deal with separately are those which have grammatically stated peculiari- ties of distribution. 
Since, then, we are not in general interested in any particular element selected in advance, our interest in those elements that do occur cannot be merely in the tautologic statement THAT they occur, but in the empirical statement of HOW they occur: which ones occur next to which others, or in the same environment as which others, and so on-that is, in the relative occurrence of these elements with respect to each other. In this sense, our method is comparable to that which is used, in the case of a whole language, in compiling a grammar (which states the distributional relations among elements), rather than in compiling a dic- tionary (which lists all the elements that are found in the language, no matter where). 
Finally, since our material is a closed string of sentences, our statement about the distribution of each element can only be valid within the limits of this suc- cession of sentences, whether it be a paragraph or a book. We will see in ?2.33 that we can sometimes use information about the distribution of an element 
outside our material; but this can be only an external aid, brought in after th distribution of the element within the discourse has been completely stated. 
2.1. General statement of the method. It follows from all this that our method 
will have to provide statements of the occurrence of elements, and in particular of the relative occurrence of all the elements of a discourse within the limits of that one discourse. 
2.11. ELEMENTS IN IDENTICAL ENVIRONMENTS. We could satisfy this require- ment by setting up detailed statements of the distribution of each element within the discourse, just as in descriptive linguistics we could set up individual state- ments summarizing all the environments (i.e. the distribution) of each element in various sentences of the language. However, such individual statements are unmanageably large for a whole language, and are unwieldy even for a single text. In both cases, moreover, the individual statements are an inconvenient basis for inspection and comparison, and for the deriving of general statements. 
This content downloaded from 201.245.224.239 on Thu, 20 Jan 2022 16:15:38 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 

6 LANGUAGE, VOLUME 28, NUMBER 1 
Therefore, in discourse analysis as in descriptive linguistics, we colle ments which have like distributions into one class, and thereafter s distribution of the class as a whole rather than of each element ind 
When two elements have identical distributions, this operation of presents no problem. In descriptive linguistics, however, the opport occurs, since few words have identical distributions throughout a la may occur more frequently in a repetitive text, where two words m used in identical parallel sentences-e.g. in stylistically balanced proverbs, in sloganeering speeches, and in 'dry' but meticulous scient 
2.12. ELEMENTS IN EQUIVALENT ENVIRONMENTS. In the much mo case where two elements occur in environments which are almost b identical, we may be able to collect them into one distributional clas up a chain of equivalences connecting the two almost identical env This is done in descriptive linguistics when we say that the class of occurs before the class of nouns N, even though a particular A (say 
may never occur before a particular N (say subjugation). It is done i analysis when we say that two stretches which have the same envir one place are equivalent even in some other place where their envi 
not the same. Suppose our text contains the following four sentences: The trees turn here 
about the middle of autumn; The trees turn here about the end of October; The first frost comes after the middle of autumn; We start heating after the end of October. 
Then we may say that the middle of autumn and the end of October are equivalent because they occur in the same environment (The trees turn here about -), and that this equivalence is carried over into the latter two sentences. On that basis, we may say further that The first frost comes and We start heating occur in equiva- lent environments. (The additional word after is identical in the two environ- ments.) Such chains, which carry over the equivalence of two stretches from one pair of sentences where their environment is indeed identical to another pair of sentences where it is not, must of course be constructed with adequate safe- guards, lest everything be made equivalent to everything else, and the analysis collapse. This problem appears also in setting up classes in descriptive linguistics; 
the kind of safeguards necessary in discourse analysis will be discussed in ?2.21. More generally, if we find the sequences AM and AN in our text, we say that M is equivalent to N or that M and N occur in the identical environment A, or 
that M and N both appear as the environment of the identical element (or sequence of elements) A; and we write M = N. Then if we find the sequence BM and CN (or MB and NC) in our text, we say that B is (secondarily) equiva- lent to C, since they occur in the two environments M and N which have been found to be equivalent; and we write B = C. If we further find BK and CL, we would write K = L by virtue of their having occurred in the secondarily equiva- lent environments B and C; and so on. As an example, let us continue our text 
4Two personal names may have identical distributions. Thus, for every sentence con- taining Bill we may find an otherwise identical sentence containing Jim instead. 
1 I owe a clarification of the use of such chains to the unpublished work of Noam Chomsky. 
This content downloaded from 201.245.224.239 on Thu, 20 Jan 2022 16:15:38 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 

ZELLIG S. HARRIS: DISCOURSE ANALYSIS 7 
fragment with the following sentence: We always have a lo start heating but you've got to be prepared when the first frost say that We always have a lot of trouble is equivalent (for this got to be prepared. 
Saying that B = C does not mean that they are IN GENERAL or that they MEAN the same thing. The equal-sign is used o tion between B and C satisfies the technical requirements o is generally marked by that sign. All we mean when we wr relation is a step in a chain of equivalences: on the one han in equivalent environments (M and N); and on the other, an in which B and C are found will be considered equivalent ( It is not relevant to ask, 'Is it TRUE that B = C?' or 'Have that K = L merely because B = C and because BK and CL o proposed here is a method of analysis; the only relevant qu the method is usable, and whether it leads to valid and in Whether the method is usable can be judged on the basis of out regard to its results, as yet unseen. Whether these results be considered in Section 3 below, where we will see that the ch reveal a structure for each text. There is no question whether to put K = L, because all we indicate by K = L is that BK a that B = C. The justification will depend on the fact that equivalences together we will obtain some information ab 
the text. 2.13. EQUIVALENCE CLASSES. After discovering which s 
equivalent environments, we can group all of them togethe class. In our formulaic statement we have A = B (both occ A = C (both before N), and B = C, so that we consider A, one equivalence class. Similarly, M, N, K, L are member 
equivalence class. In our example, The trees turn here in (T1 comes after (T2) and We start heating after (T3) are all membe class T, while the middle of autumn (El) and the end of Octobe of another equivalence class E. There is yet a third class E always have a lot of trouble when and but you've got to be pre viously related to E, since both occur with the last two m occurs AFTER T, whereas E' occurs BEFORE T. 
In terms of these classes, the five sentences of our text frag as six formulas (since the last sentence was a double on E'T, E'T. It is clear that we cannot make one class out of E say that when the order of E and T is reversed (when E is get E' instead of E. If we change the members of E' to th have if they came after T instead of before, then those ch become regular members of E. For example, we might say We 
cost of a lot of trouble always, but the first frost comes in a wa pared for. This sentence has the form TE TE. The new phra of trouble always is a member of E by virtue of its occurr mark it E3. Of course, we must show that it is equivalent 
This content downloaded from 201.245.224.239 on Thu, 20 Jan 2022 16:15:38 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 

8 LANGUAGE, VOLUME 28, NUMBER 1 
lot of trouble, except for the reversed position in respect to T; need techniques which will be discussed in ?2.33. Similarly, we m the new E phrase but ... in a way you've got to be prepared for flection of the E' phrase but you've got to be prepared when. If we two reflection-equivalences, we can replace the two E' phrases phrases which we get when we put them in the E position. As a two more members of E, and no peculiar E' class. 
In such ways we can set up equivalence classes (like E) of all se have equivalent environments, i.e. the same equivalence classes o 
(before or after), within the text. The elements (or sequences of are included in the same equivalence class may be called equiva stituents of, each other. We will see later (?3.3) that in some res in extensions of the text) they may be considered substitutable able for each other. In that case the equivalence class may also 
stitution class. Note especially that the operation of grouping non-identical forms into the 
same equivalence class does not depend upon disregarding small differences in meaning among them, but upon finding them in equivalent environments. This means either finding them in identical environments (the middle of autumn and the end of October both occur in the environment The trees turn here in -) or else finding them in environments which are at the ends of a safeguarded chain of equivalences (The first frost comes and We start heating occur in the equivalent environments after the middle of autumn and after the end of October). The method is thus fundamentally that of descriptive linguistics and not of semantics. 
2.14. SENTENCE ORDER. At this point we come to an operation not used in descriptive linguistics: representing the order of successive occurrences of mem- bers of a class. In descriptive linguistics order comes into consideration only as the relative position of various sections of a sequence, as when the order of article and noun is described by saying that the first precedes the second along the line of a noun phrase. In discourse analysis we have this kind of order as among the sections of a sentence, e.g. the different orders of E and E' in respect to T. 
The order of successive sentences, or of some particular word class in various sentences (say, the relation of successive subjects), is not generally relevant to descriptive linguistics, because its distributional statements are normally valid within only one sentence at a time. Here, however, where we are dealing with a whole discourse at once, this problem is a real one. If we were considering each sentence separately, and relating it to others only for purposes of structural comparison, we could say (as in descriptive linguistics) that each sentence in our text fragment consists of TE. But since we are speaking of the text as a whole, we cannot say that it consists merely of TE six times over. The par- ticular members of E and of T are different in the various sentences; and these differences may be (for all we know) peculiar to this text, or to a group of similar texts. 
Our text fragment can be structually represented by a double array, the hori- zontal axis indicating the material that occurs within a single sentence or sub- 
This content downloaded from 201.245.224.239 on Thu, 20 Jan 2022 16:15:38 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 

ZELLIG S. HARRIS: DISCOURSE ANALYSIS 9 
sentence, and the vertical axis (here broken into two parts) cessive sentences: 
T1 E1 T3 E2 T1 E2 T3 Es 
T2 E1 T2 E4 In this double array, the various symbols in one horizont 
various sections of a single sentence or subsentence of the which they occur in the sentence (except insofar as the order explicit transformations in the course of reducing to sym from E' to E). The vertical columns indicate the various m lence class, in the order of the successive sentences in whi 
The reason why the order of symbols in a row may diff elements in a sentence, is that our linguistic knowledge o enables us to deal with the elements separately from th when we disregard in our symbols any order that is auto reappear as soon as our symbols are translated back into but ... is included in E4 even though it is necessarily sepa actual sentence (since but generally occurs at the beginnin ture, no matter which section of the sentence it may be relat form this separation of elements from their order when automatic order which has morphemic value by the mor 
grammatically equivalent to it; for example, when we replace (replacing The boss fired Jim by Jim was fired by the boss); fragment, E' before T is replaced by E after T. 
In contrast with this cavalier treatment of horizontal o anything about the order within a vertical column. Here guistic knowledge to tell us which orderings of sentences and therefore not to be represented, or which orderings can ent but equivalent orderings. A closer study of sentence sequ may some day give us such information in the future; for in simple case, it might show that sentence sequences of the equivalent to sequences of the form Q so P, or that P and with Q and P (whereas P but Q may not be similarly int but P).6 Furthermore, a closer study of a particular text, or o type, may show that certain whole sequences of sentences are changeable; and with this information we may be able to axis of the double array, for example by finding periodic patterns. Pending such specific information, however, t exact reproduction of the order of the sentences or subse 
2.15. SUMMARY. We can now survey the whole method elements (sections of the text-morphemes or morpheme 
6 Mathematics, and to a greater extent logic, have already set orders which are equivalent to each other. This equivalence can tically by finding that the distribution of each sequence is equivale Our interest here, however, is to discover other equivalences than know to have been explicitly built into a system. 
This content downloaded from 201.245.224.239 on Thu, 20 Jan 2022 16:15:38 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 

10 LANGUAGE, VOLUME 28, NUMBER 1 
to each other if they occur in the environment of (other) id elements. Each set of mutually equivalent elements is ca class. Each successive sentence of the text is then represen equivalence classes, namely those to which its various sectio obtain for the whole text a double array, the horizontal axi equivalence classes contained in one sentence, and the vertic successive sentences. This is a tabular arrangement not of (subjects, verbs, and the like), but of the patterned occurrence classes through the text. 
If the different sentences contain completely different arrangement is of no interest; but this is generally not the text there are passages in which particular equivalence classes sentences, in some characteristic pattern. The tabular arra possible to inspect this pattern; and we can derive from it formation about the text, certain structural analyses of th critiques of the text. For the equivalence classes, which are ally, the tabular arrangement shows the distribution. For t the tabular arrangement shows certain features of structure 
2.2. Procedure. We will now illustrate the procedure in det to a specific text, of a type as common today as any other t 
Millions Can't Be Wrong! 
Millions of consumer bottles of X- have been sold since its in few years ago. And four out of five people in a nationwide s prefer X- to any hair tonic they've used. Four out of five peo wide survey can't be wrong. You too and your whole family 
to any hair tonic you've used! Every year we sell more bo satisfied customers. You too will be satisfied! 
2.21. DETERMINING THE EQUIVALENCE CLASSES. The firs analysis is to decide which elements are to be taken as equiv i.e. placed in the same column of the tabular arrangement automatic--simply a matter of finding which elements hav ments; for (1) there may be several ways of breaking a sen equivalent parts, and (2) we must decide which way to look equivalence chains. 
The simplest starting point is to consider the more frequen of the text. Almost every text has particular words which times;' and these will often be key words of that text. The 
" This is the actual text of an advertisement, found on a card w been attached to a bottle of hair tonic. A considerable number of adv analyzed, because they offer repetitive and transparent material w to handle at this stage of our experience with discourse analysis. Man have been analyzed as well-sections of textbooks, conversations, e collection of these will be published soon. 
SThis will be true, though to a lesser extent, even in the writing o school admonition to use synonyms instead of repeating a word. In su 
This content downloaded from 201.245.224.239 on Thu, 20 Jan 2022 16:15:38 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 

ZELLIG S. HARRIS: DISCOURSE ANALYSIS 11 
of such a word can certainly be put into one column, i.e. And the neighboring words can be put into another sin because they occur in identical environments. In our tex apparent; but we can start with the identical, and hence repeated sequence can't be wrong. Then Millions is equiva Four out of five people in a nationwide survey, since bo 
sequence. This first step might of course also be performed for such repeated word 
of. But if we were to collect all the environments of the word of, we could use the resulting equivalence class to build up a chain of further equivalen because nothing else would be found in their environment. Whereas the c containing Millions and Four out of five ... , which we obtain from repetitions o can't be wrong, will be found, in the paragraphs below, to tie up with other tions of our text. 
From this utilization of repetitions we go on to construct chains of equiva- lence-that is, we ask what other environments occur for Millions and for Four out of five.... For Millions we have one other environment, namely of consumer bottles, etc. It will turn out in our further work (?3.2) that this environment clashes with the environments of Four out of five.... Therefore we will tentatively set aside the sequence of consumer bottles, etc. As for Four out of five people in a nationwide survey, we find it in one other environment: before say they prefer X- to any hair tonic they've used. 
We proceed along this equivalence chain by looking for some other environ- ment in which say they prefer X-... occurs. There is one such occurrence, but it differs by having you where the first occurrence has they. At first it seems that this difference makes it impossible for us to consider the two sequences equiva- lent, since our method provides for no approximation technique, no measure- ment of more and less difference, such as might permit us to say that these two sequences are similar enough to be considered equivalent. Indeed, since we do not operate with the meanings of the morphemes, the replacing of they by you might constitute a great difference (as it would if the whole text dealt with the distinction between 'you' and 'they'). As they stand, therefore, these two sequences would be left unrelated by our method; at most that method could separate out the identical and the different portions. It so happens, however, that a little consideration shows these two sequences to be contextually identical -that is, identical in respect to their relevant environment or context. This will be seen in ?2.31. 
In constructing chains of equivalence the first safeguard is adherence to the formal requirements of the method. If we never make any approximations, never overlook some 'small' difference in environment, we will be certain that any two members of one equivalence class have at least one environment in common. If we wish to put two elements into one class even though no environ- 
will often be found in the same environments as the original not-to-be-repeated word. In contrast, when a writer has used a different word because he intends the particular dif- ference in meaning expressed by it, the synonym will often occur in correspondingly dif- ferent environments from the original word. 
This content downloaded from 201.245.224.239 on Thu, 20 Jan 2022 16:15:38 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 

12 LANGUAGE, VOLUME 28, NUMBER 1 
ment of one is identical with some environment of the other, it will 
at the cost of some explicit assumption, added to the method, whic the two environments or nullifies their difference. 
The final factor in our decision to include or not to include two elements in one equivalence class is the way the resulting class will function in the analysis of the text, i.e. the kind of double array we get by using that class. This factor must play a part, since there are often various possible chains of equivalence that equally satisfy our method. The criterion is not some external consideration like getting the longest possible chain, but rather the intrinsic consideration of finding some patterned distribution of these classes, i.e. finding some structural fact about the text in terms of these classes. In other words, we try to set up such classes as will have an interesting distribution in our particular text. This may seem a rather circular safeguard for constructing equivalence chains. But it simply means that whenever we have to decide whether to carry an equivalence chain one step further, we exercise the foresight of considering how the new 
interval will fit into our analyzed text as it appears when represented in terms of the new class. This kind of consideration occurs in descriptive linguistics when we have to decide, for example, how far to subdivide a phonemic sequence into morphemes.8 
One might ask what right we have to put two words into one equivalence class merely because they both occur in the same environment. The answer is that the equivalence class indicates no more than the distributional work which its mem- bers do in the text. If the two words occur only in identical or equivalent environ- ments in this text, then in this text there is no difference in their distribution 
(aside from their order in the column, which is preserved). We are not denying any difference in meaning, or in distribution outside this text. 
So far we have recognized two equivalence classes. One, which we will mark P, at present includes 
Millions 
Four out of five people in a nationwide survey The other, which we will mark W, at present includes 
can't be wrong 
say they prefer X- to any hair tonic they've used 2.22. SEGMENTATION. Once we have a rough idea of what equivalence classes 
we wish to try out in our text, we segment the text into successive intervals in such a way as to get, in each interval, like occurrences of the same equivalence classes. If our classes so far are P and W, and if we have a few PW successions, we try to segment into intervals each containing precisely one P and one W. For example, the title of the advertisement is represented by PW. The first sentence after the title seems to contain a P (the word Millions), but the rest of the sen- tence neither equals nor contains W; hence the sentence is as yet unanalyzed, and even its P is in doubt. 
8 Cf. Harris, Methods in structural linguistics 160 (Chicago, 1951). It goes without saying that this vague use of foresight is a preliminary formulation. Detailed investigations will show what may be expected from different kinds of equivalence chains, and will thus make possible a more precise formulation of safeguards. 
This content downloaded from 201.245.224.239 on Thu, 20 Jan 2022 16:15:38 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 

ZELLIG S. HARRIS: DISCOURSE ANALYSIS 13 
Assignment of an element to a particular class is always relat ment of its environment. The elements are not defined except in environment. For all we know, Millions in this sentence migh same word as Millions in the title. In descriptive linguistics t identical segments are the same morpheme only if they occur pheme class: sun and son would presumably have to be consid morpheme, no less than table (of wood) and table (of statisti occur in different morpheme classes, e.g. sea and see, they cert same morpheme; and if we want to keep in view the connect table and (to) table, we have to speak of classed and unclassed say that the unclassed morpheme table appears both in the N c 
class. Similarly, if Millions occurs twice we try to consider it morpheme (hence in the same class), and so consider its two equivalent. But we may find later that a better text-analysis is considering those two environments equivalent (because the fi is equivalent to one sequence A in the text, while the second i different sequence B which is not equivalent to A). In that case consider the two occurrences of Millions as belonging to two In ?3.2, we will find this to be the case here. 
To return to our segmentation. The second sentence in our the third is PW. Hence we try to segment our text into success of which will contain just PW and no more. These stretches successive rows of our double array. They will often be whole s necessarily: they may also be the separate sections of a comp each of which has its own sentence structure (as in the two they may also be any other stretches taken out of the sentenc we found in our advertisement the sentence Millions of people can't be wrong when they say they prefer X-, which as it stands of PPWW, we would try to reduce it to two PW intervals. Su segmentations require care, since we want not only the P and t to be the same in each interval, but also the relation between P same. When each whole sentence in a string is reduced to PW between P and W in each interval is the same; from descriptiv know it is the relation of subject to predicate. We do not need to information in tabulating our text as a succession of PW, but w whatever the relation between P and W in one interval, it is th other intervals. Otherwise we would be wrong in saying, wh double array as the successive TE of ?2.14, that the successiv identical in terms of T and E. Techniques for checking the sam tion between the equivalence classes in each row will be discu 
2.23. SETS OF LIKE SEGMENTS. The attempt to divide a text containing the same equivalence classes (in the same relation t not generally succeed throughout a whole text. There may b tences here and there which simply do not contain these classe out to be introductory sentences, or offshoots of some other s classes. And there may be successive sections of the text, each 
This content downloaded from 201.245.224.239 on Thu, 20 Jan 2022 16:15:38 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 

14 LANGUAGE, VOLUME 28, NUMBER 1 
its own equivalence classes different from those of other sections. paragraph-like or chapter-like sub-texts within the main text. 
In the course of seeking intervals which contain the same classe 
dures will discover the limits of this sameness, i.e. the points at 
text-intervals containing different classes. In the general case, the 
be reduced not to a single set of identical rows (each row, like TE, 
an interval with the same equivalence classes), but to a successio 
identical rows, with occasional individually different rows occurring a or another. 
Having obtained this result, we compare the various sets and in to see what similarities and differences exist among them in the a their classes, whether the specific classes are different or not. We try patterns in the occurrence of such similarities among the succes individually different rows. For example, let a text come out to TE A'B' EP EP AB KD LM LM K'D' MS MS MS FBV MS. Then, using [TE] to indicate a set of TE intervals, and temporarily disregarding the FBV, we can represent the text by AB [TE] A'B' [EP] AB KD [LM] K'D' [MS]. We 
note, further, that AB [TE] A'B' [EP] and KD [LM] K'D' [MS] are structurally identical: both have the form w [xy] w' [yz]. This form is a particular relation of w, x, y, and z. Our text consists of two occurrences of this structure, with the w of the first occurrence (that is, the AB) appearing again between the two struc- tures (or before the second structure), and with a unique FBV before the end of the last structure. 
2.3. Accessory techniques. The main procedure, as described in the foregoing section, must be refined and supplemented by a number of accessory techniques. 
2.31. INDEPENDENT OCCURRENCE. The distribution of equivalence classes (their pattern of occurrence), and the segmentation of intervals containing them, depend on what we recognize as an occurrence of an element. At first sight, this 
would seem to be trivial: in the stretch say they prefer X- to any hair tonic they've used we obviously find say once, they twice, and so on. Closer consideration, however, will show that not all occurrences of elements are independent: there are some elements which occur, in a given environment, only when some other element is present. This situation is known from descriptive linguistics; for example, the -s of he walks is taken not as an independent element but as an automatic concomitant of he, by comparison with I walk, you walk;' and in forms like both he and I the and always occurs if both is present, so that both ... and can be taken as one element rather than two. In the same way, if in a partic- ular text we find identical (repeated) or different elements, of which one occurs only if the other is present, we conclude that these occurrences are not independ- ent of each other, and mark their joint occurrence as a single element in the rep- resentation of the text. 
For they prefer X- to any hair tonic they've used, our only comparison is You too and your whole family will prefer X- to any hair tonic you've used. In each case, 
9 The -s is also a part of all singular nouns (The child walk-s, etc.). Or else walks, goes, and the like can be taken as alternants of walk, go, etc. after he and singular nouns. 
This content downloaded from 201.245.224.239 on Thu, 20 Jan 2022 16:15:38 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 

ZELLIG S. HARRIS: DISCOURSE ANALYSIS 15 
the stretch before prefer contains the same word that we fi therefore say that the word before 've is not independen one or the other member of the set they/you depends on w occurs before prefer. Writing Q as a sign to repeat that mem you which occurs in the stretch before prefer, we obtain 
they prefer X- to any hair tonic Q've used 
You ... will prefer X- to any hair tonic Q've used It now appears that by reducing these stretches to their the latter sections have become identical. On this basis, t of these two sentences are found to have identical envir be equivalent. Since the first of these beginning section class P, we can now include the section You too ... in P as 
This is only one kind of dependent occurrence. There a have to be investigated; and the resulting information is analysis and to a more detailed descriptive linguistics. 
One major example is that of the pronouns. If the adv You ... will prefer it instead of You ... will prefer X-, we it as a new element, to be placed in a new equivalence c currence of it is dependent on the occurrence of X-: if contained the plural morpheme (X-s), the pronoun in th 
been them. Other words of the it group, say he or you, will 
as X- occurs in the preceding sentence; but they could 
words were used in place of X-. The same is true of word 
which, which also depend on particular words occurring 
passage. Without using any information about the meani 
or about their 'referring' to preceding nouns, we can con 
tribution in the text that they are not independent ele 
(discontinuous) portion of the occurrence of the morph correlate. 
Another type of dependent occurrence is found in such reference as each other and together, which carry out in lang tions filled in mathematical expressions by variables-bu more complex way that is characteristic of language. Th Lorch saw each other at the same moment is normal; but if Lorch, every native speaker of English will immediately something else. To put it differently: we will not find any s each other but does not contain either the expression and Z o in the relevant noun. Furthermore, though we will find and positrons attract each other, we will not find-at least the same sentence with the words and positrons omitted other changes such as repel in place of attract. 
10 Before this can be done, some further operations must be ca out of five ... say they prefer ... to two PW sequences: Four ... s with the sentence You ... will prefer ... as a third PW sequence. they would be left hanging, since the P section (equivalent to Mil 
five people in a nationwide survey, and the corrected W section You ... will prefer ... ) is only prefer X- to any hair tonic Q've us 
This content downloaded from 201.245.224.239 on Thu, 20 Jan 2022 16:15:38 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 

16 LANGUAGE, VOLUME 28, NUMBER 1 
It may be noted that dependent elements are especially prone to different equivalence classes in their various occurrences, since e of them is assigned to the class of whatever element correlate ticular occurrence. If the text contained You will prefer X-, Y The survey showed, It showed, the first occurrence of it would be class of X-, the second it to the class of survey. 
In all such cases the special relations of dependent occurrence elements can be eliminated by considering the dependent elem a portion of that element with which it correlates (upon which depends). It should be clear that when we speak of dependence, required to apply within a particular text. The dependence of p reference words upon some neighboring noun may hold in eve these words occur; but the dependence between the two occurr of you in our text is peculiar to this text. Elsewhere we may f they prefer X- to any hair tonic you've used; but in this parti 
sentence does not occur. It is for that reason that in this text we can tell what the second pronoun must be by looking at the first one. 
2.32. SUBDIVISIONS OF SENTENCES. The recognition of dependent elements affects our decision concerning the number of intervals into which a particular sentence is to be subdivided. 
Where an element has dependent portions spread over a domain, we generally have to consider the whole domain as entering into one interval with that ele- ment. For example, in they prefer X- to any hair tonic they've used we have estab- lished that the two occurrences of they are interdependent in this text. Hence we can analyze this section into they (occurring over both positions) plus ... prefer X- to any hair tonic ... 've used; and similarly for the sentence with you (also over both positions). This is a more general treatment that that of ?2.31, which gave favored status to the first occurrence of they and of you by considering the second occurrence to be dependent on the first, and which made the identity of the two sentences in their latter portions depend on their both containing the same kind of dependence (Q). The present treatment eliminates dependence by viewing the single they or you as occurring over two positions, and makes the second parts of the sentences identical without qualification. The effect of this new treatment is that since the two-position they stretches over almost the whole length of the second part, the whole of that second part has to be kept in the same interval as they. The consolidation of the two occurrences of they thus pre- cludes our setting up two intervals here; otherwise we might have set up two intervals: they prefer ... , and either they've used or Q've used. 
On the other hand, there are cases where recognition of dependence leads us to distinguish more intervals than we might otherwise. Take the sentence Casals, who is self-exiled from Spain, stopped performing after the fascist victory. If we investigate the text in which this is imbedded we will find that the who is de- pendent upon Casals, much as the second they above is dependent upon the first: the text includes And the same Casals who ..., but later The records which .... We may therefore say that the who 'contains' Casals, i.e. either continues it or repeats it. But which does it do? If who continues Casals, we have one interval, 
This content downloaded from 201.245.224.239 on Thu, 20 Jan 2022 16:15:38 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 

ZELLIG S. HARRIS: DISCOURSE ANALYSIS 17 
the first section (C) being Casals who, while the second sect exiled ... stopped ... . If who repeats Casals instead of contin two intervals, one imbedded in the other: the first consists plus stopped performing (marked Si), the second of who (tak of Casals) plus is self-exiled (S2). We would be led to the sec we could show in terms of the text that is self-exiled ... and s ... are two separate elements (not just two portions of one l example, if we found in the text two additional sentences: say why he stopped performing, etc. But he has stated publicly wh etc. In either case who contains Casals. But if the original sen S, we analyze it as CS, whereas if (on the basis of the later s the original sentence as Casals who S2S1, we analyze it as CCS into two intervals CS2 and CS1, with the result that S2 and since they both occur after C. The only difference between element as a continuation and taking it as a repetition is in t 
tervals - one or two - into which we then analyze the total We have seen here that when a sentence contains an element A which is de- 
pendent upon B, we have the choice of taking the whole sentence as one interval, with A simply a continuation of B, or as two intervals-one containing B and the other containing A in the same class as B. The latter choice will generally be taken if the rest of the sentence can be divided into two comparable sections, one to go with A and the other with B. 
Choices of this type can arise even where there are no dependent forms. For 
example, in our second text we have the further sentence The self-exiled Casals 
is waiting across the Pyrenees for the fall of Franco. We wish to put self-exiled in 
the same class as is self-exiled ... , since the same morphemes are involved (pro- 
vided we can show from the text itself that self-exiled is equivalent to self-exiled 
from Spain). This gives us the peculiar sentence structure S2CS2, as compared 
with the previous CS sentences. Now if by good fortune the text also contained 
the sentence Casals is waiting across the Pyrenees for the fall of Franco (which is 
too much to ask in the way of repetition), we would be in position to make the 
following analysis. We have as sentences of the text CS1, C is S2, S2CS3, CS3. 
The sequences S1 and S2 and S3 are all members of one equivalence class S, since 
they all occur after C. Our problem lies with the maverick S2CS3. Let us now say 
that any sentence X1AX2 can be 'transformed' into A is Xi: AX2 .10a This means 
that if X1AX2 occurs in the text, then A is XI: AX2 also occurs in the text. 
In that case we will consider X1AX2 equivalent to A is X1: AX2; as a new 
structure our maverick has disappeared. We replace S2CS3 by the transforma- 
tionally equivalent C is S2 and CS3, both of which occur elsewhere in the same text. 
We may proceed on this basis even to transformations which are not already justified by the text, provided they do not conflict with the text. Thus, we find in the text the sentences The memorable concerts were recorded in Prades ... The 
10a In such formulas as A is X1: AX2, the italic colon indicates the end of a sentence or interval. (It is used instead of a period because that might be mistaken for the period at the end of a sentence in the author's exposition.) 
This content downloaded from 201.245.224.239 on Thu, 20 Jan 2022 16:15:38 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 

18 LANGUAGE, VOLUME 28, NUMBER 1 
concerts were recorded first on tape. We can represent this as M equivalence of R, and R2 being shown, let us suppose, elsewhere and we would transform the first sentence into N is M: NR,. This doe 
that we claim that our transformation N is M (The concerts wer 
actually occurs in the text, or that there is no stylistic or other 
tween saying The memorable concerts were recorded in Prades an 
concerts were memorable: The concerts (or They) were recorded in Pra 
our transformation means is that MNR, is taken as equivalent to 
because S2CS3 is actually found as an equivalent of C is S2: CS3, in both occur in the modified text. 
On the one hand, we have eliminated from our tabular arrangement the peculiar interval structure MNR, or S2CS3--peculiar because the other intervals all have the form NR or CS. On the other hand, we have discovered that M (or rather is M) is a member of the R class. But our most important result is that a sentence may be represented as two intervals even when it does not contain two sets of the requisite equivalence classes. This happens when we can show that a single class in the sentence relates independently to two other classes or ele- ments elsewhere. That class is then repeated, once in each interval; and each interval will indicate separately its relation to one of the other classes."1 
These difficulties in dividing a sentence into intervals arise from questions 
about the manner in which the equivalence classes relate to each other. In a 
sentence, the various morphemes or sequences do not merely occur together; 
they usually have a specific relation to each other which can be expressed by one 
or more morphemes of order: You wrote Paul and Paul wrote you differ only in 
their morphemic order. If we find several CS intervals in our text, that means that 
C has a particular relation to S-that of occurring with it and before it. Since 
we are operating without meaning, we do not know what this relation is, but we 
are careful to represent the same morphemic order in the sentence by the same 
class order in the interval. Now when we find S2CS3, we do not know how this 
order relates to the order CS, and we can make no comparison of the two sentences. 
It is therefore desirable to rearrange the unknown S2CS3 so0 that it will contain the same classes in the same order as other intervals-and of course we must 
show that the rearrangement is equivalent, for this text, to the original. In most cases this can be done only if we break the unknown sentence, by means of such transformations as have been discussed above, into two or more intervals, in such a way that the smaller intervals have a form which occurs in this text. 
In this way we get a great number of structurally similar intervals even in a text whose sentences are very different from each other. 
2.33. GRAMMATICAL TRANSFORMATIONS. Up to this point we have seen how the structure of a text can be investigated without using any information from outside the text itself. The straightforward procedure is to set up equivalence classes, and to discover patterned (i.e. similar or partly similar) combinations 
11 The case which we have been considering here is the important one of the sequence adjective + noun + verb, in which the noun relates independently to the adjective and to the verb. The adjective can be represented as a predicate of the noun in the same way as the verb. This will be discussed in ?2.33 below. 
This content downloaded from 201.245.224.239 on Thu, 20 Jan 2022 16:15:38 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 

ZELLIG S. HARRIS: DISCOURSE ANALYSIS 19 
of these classes in successive intervals of the text. Often, small classes and dissimilar intervals, because the sentences ar each other; when this happens, we find that by comparing text we can sometimes show that one section of one sente this text) to a different section of another sentence, and same classes. The extent to which we can do this depend repetition in the text. 
We raise now the question of advancing further in the same information from outside the text. The information will be of the same kind as 
we have sought inside the text, namely whether one section of a sentence is 
equivalent to another (in the sense that MNR is equivalent to N is M: NR). 
It will go back to the same basic operation, that of comparing different sentences. And it will serve the same end: to show that two otherwise different sentences 
contain the same combination of equivalence classes, even though they may con- tain different combinations of morphemes. What is new is only that we base our equivalence not on a comparison of two sentences in the text, but on a com- parison of a sentence in the text with sentences outside the text. 
This may seem to be a major departure. One may ask how we know that any equivalence discovered in this way is applicable to our text. The justification was given in ?1.3 above: if we can show that two sequences are equivalent in any English sentences in which they occur, then they are equivalent in any text written in English. If in any English sentence containing XAY, the XA Y is equivalent to A is X: A Y, then if we find S2CS3 in our English text we can say that it is equivalent to C is S2: CS3. 
But what is 'equivalence'? Two ELEMENTS are equivalent if they occur in the same environment within the sentence. Two SENTENCES in a text are equivalent simply if they both occur in the text (unless we discover structural details fine enough to show that two sentences are equivalent only if they occur in similar structural positions in the text). Similarly, two sentences in a language are equiva- lent if they both occur in the language. In particular, we will say that sentences of the form A are equivalent to sentences of the form B, if for each sentence A we can find a sentence B containing the same morphemes except for differences due to the difference in form between A and B. For example, N1VN2 is equiva- lent to N2 is V-en by N1 because for any sentence like Casals plays the cello we can find a sentence The cello is played by Casals. 
We do not claim that two equivalent sentences necessarily mean exactly the same thing, or that they are stylistically indifferent. But we do claim that not all sentences are equivalent in this sense: the relation of equivalence is not useless, as it would be if it were true for all sentences. For example, NVN2 is not equiva- lent to N1 is V-en by N2, because the latter form will be found only for certain N1 and N2 forms (I saw you and I was seen by you) but not for all forms (we will not find Casals is played by the cello).12 We claim further that the application of 
12 True, one might claim that this last sentence is still 'grammatical'. But present-day grammar does not distinguish among the various members of a morpheme class. Hence to require that sentence B must contain the same morphemes as sentence A is to go beyond grammar in the ordinary sense. 
This content downloaded from 201.245.224.239 on Thu, 20 Jan 2022 16:15:38 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 

20 LANGUAGE, VOLUME 28, NUMBER 1 
this grammatical equivalence from outside the text will en additional similar intervals in our text, beyond what we cou comparing the text sentences with each other. Thus, we can environments who, he, etc. are grammatically equivalent to 
and that N1 who V1V2 is equivalent to N1V2: N1V1. Then, in exiled ... stopped performing ..., we have two intervals CS1: C is this result (without having to worry whether Casals who i currence of C or two repeated occurrences) even if there were n of who within the text, i.e. when no analysis could be made textual grounds. The usefulness of grammatical equivalenc if, for example, we have a number of intervals all containing Ca others interlarded among the first but containing he, and if we mon textual environments to show that Casals and he are as we accept this equivalence grammatically, we can show th ments of Casals are equivalent to those of he; and this in tu equivalences discoverable textually. 
Grammatical equivalence can be investigated more systema duce a technique of experimental variation. Given a senten desired form B, we try to alter A by only the formal diffe tween it and B, and see what happens then to our A. Given T certs were recorded ..., suppose that we want to make this M parable in form to previous intervals beginning with N. To variation of the sentence beginning The concerts. We may d informant into a genuine social speech situation (not a lingu speech) in which he would utter a sentence beginning The conce the words memorable and recorded."3 Or we may do it by th servation, hunting for a sentence that begins with The con memorable and recorded. By either method, we might get The c rable and were recorded, or something of the sort,14 whence w (or any adjective) is shifted to the other side of N (its following is; MN is equivalent to N is M. In this way we discover shifted to a form beginning with N, an is appears between N an 
This technique of varying the grammatical form of a sent its morphemes constant cannot be used within a text; for t to inspect the available material. But it can be used in the la text, where we have the right, as speakers, to create any so might favor another speaker's uttering one rather than an 
13 To give a crude example, one can read the text sentence The me recorded in company with an informant, and then stop and say to hi hesitant way, 'That is to say, the concerts-', waiting for him to su 
14 We may find a great many sentences beginning with The conce other two words, e.g. The concerts were not memorable but were nevert sentences will contain various words in addition to those of the orig only new word which will occur in ALL sentences of the desired for subclass of the NMR sentences) will be a form of the verb to be. Hen word that is essential when changing to that form. 
This content downloaded from 201.245.224.239 on Thu, 20 Jan 2022 16:15:38 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 

ZELLIG S. HARRIS: DISCOURSE ANALYSIS 21 
sentences at his disposal. It is especially useful in a language l so many morphemes occur in various grammatical classes. 
The preceding paragraph indicates the basic safeguard in app equivalence to extend our textual equivalence classes. We do What sentence-forms are equivalent to MNR? There may instead, Since N... is a common form in this text, and since w can we replace this by an equivalent sentence of the form N.. change is not arbitrary, but comes entirely from the text. As be of dividing our sentences into the most similar intervals pos whether there is a grammatical equivalence which would conn form N...; the answer is yes, provided an is appears in the f yields is M as equivalent to R. As elsewhere in linguistics, th collapse all sentences into any arbitrary form we choose; it si describe the rarer forms of the text (MNR) in terms of the c 
For analysis purely within the text, all we need to know ar boundaries. To utilize grammatical equivalences we need morpheme class to which each morpheme in our text belongs, 
statements concern classes rather than individual morpheme statement in this instance is that adjective + noun is equiva adjective; to apply it to our sequence MN, we must know th jective and the N a noun. 
It has been found empirically that a relatively small numbe equivalences are called upon, time after time, in reducing the to similar intervals. Hence even a non-linguist can get conside about the text by using (in addition to the internal textual m list of major grammatical equivalences for the language. Som equivalences are given here, without any evidence for their v only a very rough indication of the sentence-environments in wh 
(1) If we find XCY, then X = Y (X is equivalent to Y). The C like and, but, or, or else, under special circumstances, a phra rather than, A-er than. The X and Y must be in the same gramm in I phoned him but he was out, X and Y are each NV; in I saw it 
Y is only the verb phrase went on, and hence the X can inclu 
phrase saw it (not the whole sequence I saw it). It follows that N1VTCN2V7. is equivalent to two intervals N1V1: N2V2, and NVICV2 = NVI: NV2. 
(2) The sequence N1 is N2 indicates that N1 = N2. The class of is includes remains and other verbs. 
(3) 2 NT12, with a primary stress on each N, indicates that N1 = N2; e.g. The pressure P increases is equivalent to The pressure increases and P increases. 
(4) NV (that) NV = NV: NV; e.g. I telegraphed that we'll arrive tomorrow is equivalent to I telegraphed: We'll arrive tomorrow. 
(5) N1VN2 = N2V*N1, where V and V* are respectively active and passive. or passive and active. 
11 A for adjective, N for noun, V for verb, P for preposition. Subscripts indi- cate particular morphemes, regardless of their class. 
This content downloaded from 201.245.224.239 on Thu, 20 Jan 2022 16:15:38 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 

22 LANGUAGE, VOLUME 28, NUMBER 1 
(6) N1PN2 = N2P*NI; e.g. (They seek) the goal of certainty is equiv some such form as (They seek) certainty as a goal. The change in prepositi two nouns are reversed is far greater than the corresponding change In verbs the change is effected simply by adding or subtracting the passiv pheme and the word by; in prepositions it is effected by replacing one for entirely different form. The pairs of equivalent prepositions are not tween certain nouns, the substitute for of may be as; between others, with. Nevertheless, it is possible to find structures in which the nou sequence NPN2 are reversed. 
(7) NPN2 = A2N1, i.e. the morpheme of the second noun occurs in tival form before the prior noun, as in medical training for training in m 
(8) Pronouns like he, and certain words with initial wh- and th-, rep ceding noun. Which noun they repeat (when there are several nouns p depends on the details of the grammatical environment; usually it i mediately preceding noun, or the last noun that occurs in a comparab matical environment. Thus, who = the man in The man who phoned lef (N who V1V2 = NV2: NV1); who = my roommate in The man spoke to mate, who told him to call again (N1VN2 who V2 = N1,VN2: N2V2). T many variant ways of determining which noun is repeated by a pro which verb belongs with each noun. In the man who phoned, no subje inerted before phoned, hence who must be taken as subject. In The ma was out, we reduce first to I phoned: The man was out; then, since no be inserted after phoned in the original sentence, we set the man as t of phoned and obtain the equivalent I phoned the man: The man was out (N 
= N2V,1N: N1V2). 
(9) NVI, V2-ing = NV,: NV2; e.g. They escaped, saving nothing is equ They escaped: They saved nothing. 
(10) NICN2VX = NVN2: N2VN,. Here X represents a class of cro ence expressions like each other; e.g. The Giants and the Dodgers each beat twice is equivalent to The D beat the G twice: The G beat the D twice. T lence differs somewhat for different groups of X forms. 
(11) ANV = N is A: NV, as in the example The self-exiled Casals... i So also NVAN, = NVN, who is A = NVN,: N, is A; e.g. They read t 
dicted books = They read the books which were interdicted = They read th The books were interdicted. 
(12) NVN2PN3 = N1VN2: NVPN3. That is, a double object can be by two separate objects in two intervals which repeat the subject and I bought it: I bought for you for I bought it for you. 
These grammatical equivalences preserve the morphemes and the gr cal relations among them, though in a changed grammatical form. W 
get NVN2 = NsVN1, because that would change the subject-object re the verb; but N2V*N1 is obtainable as an equivalent of NVN2 becaus 
too is changed here, in a way that preserves its grammatical relation 
16 The only way to express the exclusion of an object here purely in terms of of elements is to say that the object already occurs. This cannot be I, since t subject of phoned; hence it must be the other N, the man. 
This content downloaded from 201.245.224.239 on Thu, 20 Jan 2022 16:15:38 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 

ZELLIG S. HARRIS: DISCOURSE ANALYSIS 23 
reversed nouns. Preservation of the grammatical relations is such relations are always to be found among the morphemes is to say, there are restrictions of substitutability and order and the various morphemes (or morpheme classes) in a sentence; from one sentence to an equivalent sentence, we want upon m original sentence to get back the same restrictions-since th sentences, is defined by the restrictions among its parts. Th break up a sentence into various intervals for a tabular arran want two combinations of the same equivalence classes (say ou TE combinations above) to represent different grammatica ingly, when we transform a sentence containing certain equ are careful to preserve the original grammatical relations am 
Sometimes, however, we find sections of a sentence which c 
equivalence classes; that is (in the simplest case), they contain 
recurs elsewhere in the text. The grammatical relation of un 
rest of the sentence must be preserved in our tabular arrang 
the relation of recurrent sections; but here we escape the pro 
their relation while changing their relative position, since w 
change their position at all: it is only our equivalence classe 
rearrange. All we want of this non-recurrent material is to know 
equivalence classes, and to indicate this relation in our analy 
able to learn this from a study of our text alone; but we can lear 
in grammatical information or experimental variation. For an 
to the sequences Casals, who is self-exiled from Spain ... an 
Casals .... If the latter is S2C, the former is C, C is S from 
Spain does not recur, we want only to know where to keep i 
our equivalence classes, i.e. what its relation is to these classes. Fr we know that in sentences in the form NVAPN the smallest unit of which PN 
is an immediate constituent is APN, and that this APN is replaceable by A alone." Therefore, if the A happens to be a member of one of our equivalence classes while the PN is not, we associate the PN with the A in its equivalence column by writing APN instead of A as the member of the class. 
More generally, material that does not belong to any equivalence class, but is grammatically tied to a member of some class, is included with that member to form with it an expanded member of the class in question. Thus, self-exiled 
from Spain is now in the same class as self-exiled. The justification for this is that since the material does not occur again in this text (or occurs again only in the same grammatical relation to the same equivalence class), its only effect, when the text is represented in terms of particular equivalence classes, is precisely its relation to the particular member to which it is grammatically tied. 
An interesting special case arises when two members of the same equivalence class constitute jointly the next larger grammatical unit of their sentence (i.e. are the immediate constituents of that unit), for example when the two are an adjective and a following noun, where AN = N. In such a case we may consider that the two together constitute just one member of their class, and fit together 
17 Semantically one would say that the PN 'modifies' the A. 
This content downloaded from 201.245.224.239 on Thu, 20 Jan 2022 16:15:38 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 

24 LANGUAGE, VOLUME 28, NUMBER 1 
into a single interval. If we took them as two occurrences of their have to put each occurrence into a separate interval. 
Grammatical information is especially useful in the recogniti connectives. These morphemes are easily identified from forma independently of their meaning, but may not be identifiable a textual evidence. Their importance lies in the fact that many se may contain the same classes except for some unassigned words ginning, which are grammatically connecters or introducers o stand outside the specific classes which comprise the sentence o tabular arrangement these elements can be assigned, by their g tion, to a special front column. We can go beyond this and assi column any material which is not assignable to any of the equi Sometimes. such connecting material is not immediately obvious sentences of the form NV that N1Vi can be analyzed as consisti lence classes N1V1, with the NV that relegated to the front column example, We are proud that these concerts were recorded by ou the known members of equivalence classes are concerts and rec ceding words do not recur in the text and are not grammatic particular class member. Quite the contrary, they can be gramm by introductory adverbs like indeed, even though in a purely g they are the major subject and predicate of the sentence. 
In addition to making use of the grammatical relations of wh classes, we can use information about the relation of particular grammatical subclasses to grammatical classes. For instance, i establish that intransitive verbs (in some languages) form a sub occurs with an object and which is equivalent to a transitive ve In a given text, this may enable us to put a transitive verb with same column as a comparably placed intransitive verb. 
Finally, there are a great many detailed equivalences which ap morphemes. This information is not provided by descriptive l deals generally with whole morpheme classes. But it can be obta methods, since it deals with matched occurrences and special re in most cases it is necessary to study the restrictions over more th at a time. Suppose, for example, that we find the words buy a Their environments in that text may not be sufficiently similar t the same equivalence class, even though it might promote th text if we could do so. But if we investigate a good number of in which the two words occur, we will find that the two often app environments, and that in certain respects they are distribu 
each other; that is, we will find many sequences like N1 buys f 
to N1 (I bought it from him at the best price I could get, but he sti 
a profit). If the environments of buy and sell in our text are simi environments of the other short texts, we may be able, by compa 
wider results, to put the two into one equivalence class in our even to analyze one as the inverse of the other. 
In this way we can put more words into one textual class than w 
This content downloaded from 201.245.224.239 on Thu, 20 Jan 2022 16:15:38 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 

ZELLIG S. HARRIS: DISCOURSE ANALYSIS 25 
be possible, and we can make use of what would seem to be connections between words (as between buy and sell, or even betw verb and the presence of an object) without departing from a pu of occurrences. The reason is that differences in meaning cor differences in linguistic distribution; and if we have two related tributional similarities cannot be shown within the confines o often be able to show them in a larger selection of texts, even of 
The kind of outside information which has been indicated h sketched in scattered examples, both because the field is va great deal remains to be done. Further work in this direction useful to discourse analysis but will also have interest as an ex tive linguistics. 
3. RESULTS 
3.1. The double array. As a product of discourse analysis we obtain a succes- sion of intervals, each containing certain equivalence classes. For a tabular ar- rangement we write each interval under the preceding one, with the successive members of each class forming a column, as in ?2.14 above. The very brief text of ?2.32 is arranged as follows:17a 
C S, 
C 82 (S2 after C is is $2) C S2 (= S2C without the is) 
C S3 N Ro (= MN; Ro = is M) N R1 N R2 
The horizontal rows show the equivalence classes present in each interval, ar- ranged according to their order (or other relation) within the interval. The verti- cal columns indicate the particular members of each class which appear in the successive intervals. Material which is a member of no equivalence class, but is grammatically tied to a particular member of some class, is included with that member in its column; thus in Spain is included in the first 82. Material which is a member of no equivalence class, and is not grammatically tied to a particular member of some class, is placed in a front column (not illustrated here), which will be found to include morphemes that relate the sentences or intervals to each other, or mark some change in several classes of a single interval. The tabular arrangement thus represents the original one-dimensional text in a two-dimen- sional array, where each element has two coordinates: one horizontal, in respect 
17a The array given here represents the following sentences, taken from a review of some recent phonograph records: Casals, who is self-exiled from Spain, stopped performing after the fascist victory ... The self-exiled Casals is waiting across the Pyrenees for the fall of Franco ... The memorable concerts were recorded in Prades ... The concerts were recorded first on tape. 
(The other sentences analyzed in ?2.32 were composed by me for comparison with these.) The sentences do not represent a continuous portion of the text. This fact limits very materially the relevance of the double array; but that does not concern us here, since the array is intended only as an example of how such arrangements are set up. 
This content downloaded from 201.245.224.239 on Thu, 20 Jan 2022 16:15:38 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 

26 LANGUAGE, VOLUME 28, NUMBER 1 
to the other elements of its interval, and one vertical, in respect to members of its class. 
This double array can be viewed as representing the whole text, since every morpheme of the text is assigned to one class or another in the array, and since the array preserves the relations among the morphemes. Even when a large number of textual and grammatical transformations have been carried out, the classes and their members are defined at each step in such a way that the text can always be reproduced from the array plus the full definition of the classes in it. The individual intervals in the array may not be 'idiomatic'-that is, they may not naturally occur in speech. But the preservation of idiom is not one of the requirements of our method. All we ask is that the succession of intervals should be textually and grammatically equivalent to the original text. Although the array may suggest a critique or a possible improvement of the text, it is not meant to be used instead of the original. 
The double array can also be viewed as indicating the purely distributional relations among the equivalence classes which figure in it. From this viewpoint we can operate upon the tabular arrangement and investigate its properties. We can develop ways of simplifying the array, for example by drawing out com- mon elements, or by grouping together larger sets of equivalent sequences than we used in the formation of the array. We can learn how to accommodate various special cases, such as a mobile class which appears in close relation now with one class now with another, or which appears a different number of times in various in- tervals. We can try to regularize or 'normalize' the array by matching all the intervals, so as to establish a single 'normal' interval with which all the actual intervals can be compared: for instance, given an interval from which one of the classes is absent, we can try to transform it into one that includes all the classes, preserving equivalence during the transformation. We can attempt to formulate a general statement covering the changes in successive members of a class as we go down a column, in an effort to 'explain' or 'predict' the particular form taken by the classes of each interval-that is, to derive the successive intervals from the normal form. 
All such operations with the array have the effect of isolating the most general independent elements in terms of which we can describe the text (ultimately the horizontal and vertical axes), and of bringing out their relations to each other in the text. In this sense all such operations are but further refinements of our initial procedures. 
3.2. Findings. Various conclusions can be drawn about a particular text or type of text by studying the properties of its double array, either directly or in its most simplified forms. Many of these conclusions may well have been obtain- able intuitively without such formal analysis; but intuition does not yield results that are either explicit or rigorous. In some respects, moreover, the complexity and size of the material make it impossible for us to draw all the relevant con- clusions without painstaking formal analysis. The sample texts used in the present paper have been necessarily too short and too simple to show what kind of con- clusions the analysis yields about a particular text or style; that must be left for a future presentation of a longer sample text, though the details of method and 
This content downloaded from 201.245.224.239 on Thu, 20 Jan 2022 16:15:38 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 

ZELLIG S. HARRIS: DISCOURSE ANALYSIS 27 
the range of conclusions obtainable by means of it could be s the analysis of a great many discourses. To give some slight clusions, we will complete here the analysis of our first text 
The analysis was left at the following point: P has as m Four out of five people in a nationwide survey, You too will, (and) will. W has as members can't be wrong, prefer X- to any ha Four of the sentences (including the title) are represented by 
At this point it is difficult to proceed without recourse to gra lence (see fn. 10 above). In Four out of five ... say they prefer but with say they intervening. If our text happened to contain of five ... in equivalent environments, we could analyze this In the absence of this, we appeal to the grammatical equivalence preceding comparably-situated noun: four out of five ... as subje to they as subject of prefer. We therefore put they into the out of five. Then the sentence becomes P say PW, which is a tervals P say: PW, on the basis of the formula NV (that) N on this basis say is a member of W, since it occurs after P t terval. 
We now turn to the last sentence: You too will be satisfied. 
known P; hence be satisfied is included in W. This gives us a 
on the preceding sentence, Every year we sell more bottles of X 
sumers. Now X- to satisfied consumers is grammatically X 
equivalent to X- to N: N is A. In this way we obtain an inter 
satisfied; and since the second part of this is W, we place co rest of the sentence contains new classes: Since bottles occurs elsewhere in the 
text, we regard it as representing a possible equivalence class and mark it B; with this occurrence of B we associate the word more, which does not occur else where and which is grammatically tied to bottles. Since sell occurs elsewhere in sold (= sell + part of the passive morpheme), we mark it S; and we associate with it every year, which is grammatically tied to it. (Every year is similar in only one morpheme to since ... years ago in the first sentence; rather than try to get these phrases into new equivalence classes, we note that each is tied to the member of S that occurs near it, and we associate each phrase with its member of S). There remains we, which is not grammatically part of either the B phrase or the S phrase; even though it seems not to occur again, we place it tentatively in a new class I. (We will see below that a zero form of I may be said to occur in the first sentence.) Thus we get ISB to P. This in turn can be somewhat simplified, since it is grammatically equivalent to ISB: IS to P. 
Finally there is the first sentence, Millions of consumer bottles of X- have been sold since its introduction a few years ago. If we start with Millions as a known P, we obtain an unanalyzable remainder beginning with of. Instead, we match bottles of X- have been sold with we sell bottles of X-. The first has the form N1V; the second is N2VNI. Grammatically, have been sold is sell + past + passive hence if we take sell as V, then been sold is V*. Grammatically also, V + passive ? by N is equivalent to V + passive alone (is sold by us = is sold). Hence the lack of any by us after sold does not prevent our matching the two clauses. To 
This content downloaded from 201.245.224.239 on Thu, 20 Jan 2022 16:15:38 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 

28 LANGUAGE, VOLUME 28, NUMBER 1 
we sell bottles as N2VN1 we match bottles have been sold as N1V* can even say that the passive morpheme, with or without the fol (by + N) is equivalent to the subject of the active verb (i.e. the ver passive morpheme). If we sell bottles of X- is ISB, then bottles of sold is the equivalent BS*I with zero I. The section since ... years sociate with the preceding S*, as also the past-tense morpheme, si these figures elsewhere in our equivalence classes. Millions and c 
both members of p,18 but there is no way of making use of thi matically, consumer bottles is N1N2 = N2, and millions of N2 is N that the whole sequence is grammatically tied to bottles (as mor bottles above), leaving the sentence as BS*I. This means that the currences of P words which are lost by being included in an occ 
There is no other distributional relation that this Millions and this consumer 
have to any other class occurrence in the text (except their analogy to more); hence there is no way of including them in the double array. The same morphemes indeed occur elsewhere as P, but in different relations to other classes. 
This points up the confusing relation of the title to the first sentence. If we start with the title, we come upon Millions in the first sentence and assign it to P, on the basis of the title, only to find that there is no class P in the final analysis of the sentence. (The millions who can't be wrong turn out to be bottles."9) If we begin with the body of the advertisement, we have a class P (four out of five; you) which relates to W, and a class B (bottles, millions of ... bottles) which re- lates to S; and if we then proceed to the title, we find there the W preceded not by any known P word or by a new word which we can assign to P, but by a word which has elsewhere been associated with a member of B. (The bottles show up as people.) This is the formal finding which parallels what one might have said as a semantic critique-namely, that the text of the advertisement (millions of bottles sold; many people can't be wrong in preferring X-) fails to support the title (millions can't be wrong). 
The double array for the advertisement is not interesting in itself: 
P W Millions of People Can't Be Wrong! B S*I (the B containing pseudo-P) Millions of con- 
sumer bottles ... have been sold ... CP W And four out of five people ... say 
P W they prefer X-... P W Four out of five people ... can't be wrong. 
P W You too will prefer X-.. P W your whole family will prefer X-.. 
1 We have consumers in P; and since the singular-plural distinction does not figure in our classes, we can associate the dropping of the -s with the occurrence of consumers in the first sentence. By dropping the -s from the P-element consumers we get a P-form con- 
sumer for the sentence. 
19 Since millions of consumers would be a natural English phrase (P1 of P2 = P2), the effect of using the almost identical sequence millions of consumer in front of bottles is to give a preliminary impression that the sentence is talking about P; but when one reaches the word bottles one sees that the subject of the sentence is B, with the P words only ad- jectival to B. 
This content downloaded from 201.245.224.239 on Thu, 20 Jan 2022 16:15:38 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 

ZELLIG S. HARRIS: DISCOURSE ANALYSIS 29 
B S*I (= ISB) Every year we sell more bottles of S*I to P we sell to consumers 
P W{T consumers are satisfied 
P W You too will be satisfiedl 
3.3 Interpretations. The formal findings of this kind of analysis do more than state the distribution of classes, or the structure of intervals, or even the dis- tribution of interval types. They can also reveal peculiarities within the struc- ture, relative to the rest of the structure. They can show in what respects certain structures are similar or dissimilar to others. They can lead to a great many state- ments about the text. 
All this, however, is still distinct from an INTERPRETATION of the findings, which must take the meanings of the morphemes into consideration, and ask what the author was about when he produced the text. Such interpretation is obviously quite separate from the formal findings, although it may follow closely in the directions which the formal findings indicate. 
Even the formal findings can lead to results of broader interest than that of the text alone. The investigation of various types of textual structure can show correlations with the person or the situation of its origin, entirely without refer- ence to the meanings of the morphemes. It can also show what are the inherent or the removable weaknesses (from some given point of view) of a particular type of structure. It can find the same kinds of structure present in different texts, and may even show how a particular type of structure can serve new texts 
or non-linguistic material. Finally, such investigation performs the important task of indicating what 
additional intervals can be joined to the text without changing its structure. It is often possible to show that if, to the various combinations of classes that are found in the existing intervals of the text, we add intervals with certain new com- binations of classes, the description of the textual structure becomes simpler, and exceptions are removed (provided we leave intact any intrinsic exceptions, such as boundary conditions). The adding of such intervals may regularize the text from the point of view of discourse analysis. If for example our text contains AB: AC: ZB, we may say that Z is secondarily equivalent to A, since both occur before B, but only A before C. If there are no textually intrinsic exceptions gov- erning this restriction on Z, we can on this basis add the interval ZC to the text. 
In this extended text the equivalence A = Z is now a matter of complete sub- stitutability in an identical range of environments, rather than just the secondary result of a chain of equivalences. The addition of such intervals has a very different standing from the addition of arbitrary intervals to the text. If we want to know what is implied but not explicitly stated in a given text, or if we want to see what more can be derived from a given text than the author has already in- cluded, this search for adjoinable intervals becomes important. 
4. SUMMARY 
Discourse analysis performs the following operations upon any single con- nected text. It collects those elements (or sequences of elements) which have iden- tical or equivalent environments of other elements within a sentence, and con- 
This content downloaded from 201.245.224.239 on Thu, 20 Jan 2022 16:15:38 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 

30 LANGUAGE, VOLUME 28, NUMBER 1 
siders these to be equivalent to each other (i.e. members of the same class). Material which does not belong to any equivalence class is with the class member to which it is grammatically most closely tie tences of the text are divided into intervals, each a succession of eq classes, in such a way that each resulting interval is maximally sim class composition to other intervals of the text. The succession of i 
then investigated for the distribution of classes which it exhibits, in for the patterning of class occurrence. 
The operations make no use of any knowledge concerning the mean morphemes or the intent or conditions of the author. They require only edge of morpheme boundaries, including sentence junctures and other mo intonations (or punctuation). Application of these operations can be by making use of grammatical equivalences (or individual morpheme o relations) from the language as a whole, or from the linguistic body of w given text is a part. In that case it is necessary to know the gramma of the various morphemes of the text. 
Discourse analysis yields considerable information about the struc text or a type of text, and about the role that each element plays in such ture. Descriptive linguistics, on the other hand, tells only the role tha ment plays in the structure of its sentence. Discourse analysis tells, i how a discourse can be constructed to meet various specifications, just tive linguistics builds up sophistication about the ways in which linguistic can be constructed to meet various specifications. It also yields info about stretches of speech longer than one sentence; thus it turns out there are relations among successive sentences, these are not visible i structure (in terms of what is subject and what is predicate, or the li the pattern of occurrence of equivalence classes through successive 
This content downloaded from 201.245.224.239 on Thu, 20 Jan 2022 16:15:38 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 
