[ 471 ] Designing Good Data Visualizations Data visualization is a tool that can be used in many ways. As you've seen while building examples throughout the book, data visualization is sometimes used to communicate information in a novel or interesting way; sometimes data visualization provides clarity, other times it's just used to make cool things. Regardless of whether you're a journalist wanting to highlight a change in GDP, a scientist needing to communicate the results of an experiment, or a software engineer looking to integrate visualization into a product, chances are you'll want data visualization that is clear, concise, and does not mislead. Although the examples in this chapter will mainly be from a news media context, many of the points we'll discuss apply in a similar way to data visualization in general. In this chapter, we'll look at a few general principles to keep in mind while building data visualizations, and I'll give some examples of good data visualization as well. Note that I'm in no way a data visualization expert, per se — I'm a developer and a journalist with a degree of learned design experience, and my thoughts on what constitute "good data visualization" are very much influenced by my background in building explanatory data-driven graphics for titles like The Times, The Economist, and The Guardian. These are very fast-paced newsrooms, and the goal when visualizing data is generally to communicate the important bits of a dataset to an audience instead of letting them explore the data. Although you might not have the same demands in your use of D3 as that of a newsroom developer, much of what I'll be discussing also applies if you're using D3 in academia, publishing, or elsewhere — the skill of being able to quickly and succinctly communicate information is incredibly valuable no matter your profession. With that caveat out of the way, let's get on with discussing what exactly comprises good data visualization. Copyright @ 2016. Packt Publishing. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/18/2019 2:17 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES AN: 1364679 ; Kirk, Andy.; Data Visualization: Representing Information on Modern Web Account: undeloan.main.ehostDesigning Good Data Visualizations [ 472 ] Clarity, honesty, and sense of purpose There are two big schools of thinking in terms of data visualization at the moment: there's the ultra-minimalist philosophy espoused by Alberto Cairo and Edward Tufte, where the primary goal of data visualization is to reduce confusion, and then there are those who use data to create beautiful things that uphold design over communication. If you couldn't tell by the title of this section, I generally believe the former is far more appropriate in most cases. As somebody wishing to visually communicate data, the absolute worst thing you can do is mislead an audience, whether intentionally or not — not only do you lose credibility with your audience once they discover how they've been misled, but you also increase public skepticism over the ability of data to communicate the truth. Here's a contemporary example. In September 2015, the U.S. Congress held a hearing on Planned Parenthood, the American reproductive and women's health group. During the hearing, Republican congressman Jason Chaffetz showed the following chart, created by the anti-abortion group Americans United for Life: There are many problems with this chart, not least the complete lack of y axes. PolitiFact redrew the chart with corrected axes and it came out like this: Copyright @ 2016. Packt Publishing. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/18/2019 2:17 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES AN: 1364679 ; Kirk, Andy.; Data Visualization: Representing Information on Modern Web Account: undeloan.main.ehostChapter 7 [ 473 ] Vox took it a step further and drew the rest of Planned Parenthood's services: Copyright @ 2016. Packt Publishing. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/18/2019 2:17 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES AN: 1364679 ; Kirk, Andy.; Data Visualization: Representing Information on Modern Web Account: undeloan.main.ehostDesigning Good Data Visualizations [ 474 ] As you can see, while there has definitely been a decrease in cancer screenings and prevention services (as well as contraceptives, for that matter), and a slight rise in the number of abortions, there has also been a dramatic increase in spending for STI/ STD treatment and prevention. As Alberto Cairo commented on the original chart: "That graphic is a damn lie … Regardless of whatever people think of this issue, this distortion is ethically wrong." The public backlash about this one misleading chart led it to being named "2015's Most Misleading Chart" by Quartz. Regardless of what the creators of the chart originally intended to demonstrate with it, any hope of achieving that goal was obliterated once viewers felt they were being misled. For a more thorough discussion of everything wrong with Chaffetz's chart, I highly recommend the commentary by both PolitiFact and Vox, at http://www.politifact.com/truth-ometer/statements/2015/oct/01/jason-chaffetz/chartshown-planned-parenthood-hearing-misleading-/ and http://www.vox.com/2015/9/29/9417845/plannedparenthood-terrible-chart respectively. In the preceding quote, Cairo makes an interesting point in that communicating data carries with it certain fundamental ethical requirements. This is how data visualization differs from data art — in the latter, what's ethically required of the artist is to purposefully and honestly communicate their emotions, beliefs, fears, and so on. This is a long way off from the ethical requirement of the visualizer, which is to communicate specific qualities of the data through visual methods. Taking this a step further, the ethics of data journalism compel the journalist to tell the audience what the data really means and how it relates to that audience. In your projects, decide where your scope lies. Are you acting in the role of a data journalist, with a desire to walk the reader through a specific bunch of numbers and figures? Are you acting as a data visualizer, perhaps creating a dashboard designed to quickly and effectively summarize a very large, multivariate dataset? Or do you want to build something fun and entertaining that leverages data merely as a method by which to achieve that aim? All three of these roles are perfectly acceptable, and there is room for work ranging from incisively explained line-charts all the way through to objets d'art that give us a better understanding of our size and place in the universe. But whatever you do, be clear with your intentions and never mislead. Helping your audience understand scale A big part of visualizing data is conveying scale and differences in magnitude. The following few examples do this particularly well. Copyright @ 2016. Packt Publishing. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/18/2019 2:17 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES AN: 1364679 ; Kirk, Andy.; Data Visualization: Representing Information on Modern Web Account: undeloan.main.ehostChapter 7 [ 475 ] To start with, please view John Burn-Murdoch's graphic on high-speed elevators for the at http://www.ft.com/cms/s/2/1392ab72-64e2-11e4-ab2d-00144feabdc0. html. The following screengrab doesn't really do it justice: If the above were the live visualization, you would see the elevators in each building endlessly rise and fall, with a counter beneath tracking how many times the elevator has gone up and down while you were looking at the page. A nice bit of easing at the top and bottom makes you feel like the little magenta square traveling along the line is a real elevator, subject to physics in the same way a big metal cage rapidly moving up and down the world's tallest buildings would be. Although this printed version only communicates one dimension — the relative heights of each elevator and building — the interactive version is able to use animation to convey a second quality; that is, the speed of the elevator. In this, one can really see the power of using the digital medium to communicate data in ways a static print version will never be able to. Scale is demonstrated by tying visual content to time; in this case, merely saying "the elevator can do a return trip in 2 minutes" would not be nearly as effective as demonstrating what "2 minutes" feels like to the reader. Copyright @ 2016. Packt Publishing. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/18/2019 2:17 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES AN: 1364679 ; Kirk, Andy.; Data Visualization: Representing Information on Modern Web Account: undeloan.main.ehostDesigning Good Data Visualizations [ 476 ] Another good use of animation to explain scale is Hans Rosling's Gapminder project (http://www.gapminder.org/world/), which allows viewers to see how the world has changed over time. In his excellent TED talk about understanding the world from a data-driven perspective, Rosling discusses how, if looking at measures such as life expectancy and GDP per capita, the world is getting substantially better as time goes on, and that our perceptions of other countries are often rooted in a degree of ignorance as to how similar we generally are. As time goes on, you can watch as the bubbles in the chart migrate from the bottom-left quadrant to the upper-right. It's worth comparing the fairly-dry exploratory visualization to the TED talk (https://www.ted.com/talks/hans_ rosling_shows_the_best_stats_you_ve_ever_seen). Although depicting similar data, the latter is far more enjoyable simply due to Rosling's narration, with excitement evident in his voice as he explains how the world is improving and changing as societies develop. Good explanatory data visualization doesn't have to be limited to text output. Copyright @ 2016. Packt Publishing. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/18/2019 2:17 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES AN: 1364679 ; Kirk, Andy.; Data Visualization: Representing Information on Modern Web Account: undeloan.main.ehostChapter 7 [ 477 ] You can see an example of the preceding chart recreated using D3 by visiting Mike Bostock's implementation at http:// bost.ocks.org/mike/nations/. A much more elaborate example of embracing the digital medium to help convey scale is The Guardian's Homan Square: A Portrait of Chicago's Detainees interactive by Spencer Ackerman, Zach Stafford and the Guardian US interactive team. If you haven't seen it, please visit and prepare to have your mind utterly blown: http://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2015/oct/19/homansquare-chicago-police-detainees. It starts with a big collection of faceless grey silhouettes, each representing a single person in custody at a secretive police warehouse in Chicago: Copyright @ 2016. Packt Publishing. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/18/2019 2:17 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES AN: 1364679 ; Kirk, Andy.; Data Visualization: Representing Information on Modern Web Account: undeloan.main.ehostDesigning Good Data Visualizations [ 478 ] As you scroll, the faces fly around the screen to make up different configurations, such as this bubble chart: And even this isomorphic map: Copyright @ 2016. Packt Publishing. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/18/2019 2:17 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES AN: 1364679 ; Kirk, Andy.; Data Visualization: Representing Information on Modern Web Account: undeloan.main.ehostChapter 7 [ 479 ] The Guardian's U.S. interactive team did a fantastic Q&A about the process behind this visualization that is well worth reading — https://source.opennews.org/en-US/articles/ how-we-made-homan-square-portrait/. Although the data morphs in many different ways, you still feel an attachment to each point, remembering how they were originally displayed — they're not merely pixels on a screen; each portrait represents another person whose life has been impacted (a feeling reinforced when they single out individual portraits as case studies later on in the piece). These examples are phenomenal for communicating scale to the reader. One of the biggest reasons data visualization is such a powerful tool is that it helps answer the questions "how big is 'big'?" and "how small is 'small'?" As reporting becomes increasingly reliant on data, it becomes very easy to mislead the reader by over- or under-emphasizing scale (indeed, this is a big reason why the chart in the preceding section was considered so dishonest). This can often be mitigated by designing visual output in such a way that the viewer feels some attachment to the visual stimuli onscreen. As a final example, please visit this graphic by Ana Becker of The Wall Street Journal that attempts to visualize what your chances are of winning the Powerball lottery jackpot — it's another one where the following screenshots really won't do it justice. Also, try not to hit the jump ahead button for at least a little while, http://graphics.wsj.com/lottery-odds/: Copyright @ 2016. Packt Publishing. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/18/2019 2:17 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES AN: 1364679 ; Kirk, Andy.; Data Visualization: Representing Information on Modern Web Account: undeloan.main.ehostDesigning Good Data Visualizations [ 480 ] After a while of continuous scrolling, the screen starts to look like this: At this point, you realize there's no chance that you're going to ever physically scroll to the bottom, and so either click the jump ahead link or grab the scrollbar. If at that point you're still convinced you can plan your retirement based on your lottery earnings, probably nothing will change your mind. In a sense, scale is emphasized through comparing the initial "coin-toss" probability to the probability of picking the winning Powerball numbers. Comparing the cointoss's 1 in 2 with the Powerball's 1 in 292,201,337 is impossible to do in one screen (and especially so in print), because no matter what sort of scale you use, the latter completely dwarfs the former. Making use of the browser's practically unlimited vertical screen real estate is a very effective way of tying visual elements to a physical property (much like the elevator speeds interactive earlier), insomuch that the physical effort involved in scrolling down to just 1 percent of the page (much less, count how many dots that is) very effectively demonstrates how mind-bogglingly big a number like 292m is in the context of comparing probabilities. Copyright @ 2016. Packt Publishing. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/18/2019 2:17 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES AN: 1364679 ; Kirk, Andy.; Data Visualization: Representing Information on Modern Web Account: undeloan.main.ehostChapter 7 [ 481 ] Using color effectively One of the biggest choices you'll make when building data visualizations is choosing what colors to use to represent what. While it's certainly possible to convey a lot of information through purely monochromatic charts, using the wide range of color representable through a digital display can be a very effective way of depicting another property dimension of the data you're visualizing. If you plan to use color to communicate information, there are a few things to consider. The first is whether a user will be able to discern the pattern necessary to understand what the colors mean. If you have a legend explaining what color corresponds to what, try turning it off and thinking about whether you're still able to understand what the color combination means. Is it intending to show increasing intensity? Diverging values? Or just that it has a particular quality (in which case, do you really need a legend)? Secondly, pay some attention to people who are colorblind. The most common color combination to use for choropleth maps is generally the "stoplight" color scheme: green for low values, yellow for medium values, and red for high values (or the inverse, depending on whether a high value is a good thing or not). There's a problem with this, though — for people who are red-green colorblind, the highest and lowest values look nearly identical. Also, while still on the topic of stoplight colors, when discussing sensitive topics like immigration, a fair degree of care should be taken when color-coding anything green or red — if red means "bad" or "severe", is it actually that way? Or is it displaying red merely because the color scale has been constrained to the values in the data set? Colors are much more emotive, and it's easy to unintentionally present an opinion when using them. In general, using a sequential color scheme (scaled to the average of what one would expect that value to be) is a much safer bet. Copyright @ 2016. Packt Publishing. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/18/2019 2:17 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES AN: 1364679 ; Kirk, Andy.; Data Visualization: Representing Information on Modern Web Account: undeloan.main.ehostDesigning Good Data Visualizations [ 482 ] A very good way of finding a color scheme for a map (and quite a lot else) is using ColorBrewer (http://colorbrewer2.org), a tool built by Cynthia Brewer and Mark Harrower at Penn State. It provides a bunch of different pre-built color schemes for representing data, and you can choose the type of relationship you want to depict. Additionally, it helpfully allows filtering out color schemes that aren't colorblindfriendly, or even printer- and photocopier-friendly. You can use ColorBrewer schemes directly in D3! There's a file in the D3 repo at lib/colorbrewer/colorbrewer.js, but at the time of writing it has been removed in releases and isn't really easy for us to use with modular JavaScript. Instead, install it separately via: $ npm install colorbrewer --save And then require it as normal. For the above 7-class BuGn scale (look next to the EXPORT pane for the scheme's name), you'd write: let BuGn = require('colorbrewer').BuGn[7]; Lastly, listen to natural cues from your data: if you're doing a visualization of political parties, it makes sense to color-code the data at least somewhat similarly to the party colors (as boring as it is to always color-code political data to party colors, the novelty of not doing it this way is easily outweighed by the cognitive dissonance it causes). Copyright @ 2016. Packt Publishing. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/18/2019 2:17 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES AN: 1364679 ; Kirk, Andy.; Data Visualization: Representing Information on Modern Web Account: undeloan.main.ehostChapter 7 [ 483 ] Understanding your audience (or "trying not to forget about mobile") Your audience is one of the most critical things to consider when beginning a new data visualization project. This has two parts: the first is from an editorial perspective (what is the audience's background knowledge of this topic? What types of charts will the audience be able to recognize and properly read? How do these charts work within the broader contexts of this story and other work published?), while the second is technological (what platforms and devices will be used to consume this content?). It's really important to tentatively sketch out any bespoke data visualization before you start writing code, and this can take many forms. On one hand, it never hurts to figure out the rough shape of your data before committing to a particular visualization style — frequently I get asked for pie charts with a few small outlier values highlighted, which doesn't work (the rest of the chart dwarfs the outliers). You don't necessarily need to get a pencil and paper out for this — pasting your data into Excel and playing with its default charts often helps before committing the data idea to code. The second way you should sketch out your visualization is on a component or an interaction level. This is where understanding which devices your audience use is important. If you have previous work out there, look at its analytics. To see what percentage of readers use a specific browser in Google Analytics, look under Audience | Technology. Pay attention also to Audience | Mobile | Overview, which will tell you what proportion of your audience is comprised of mobile and desktop. If you have no analytic data to work with (for instance, if you're launching a new project), it's generally a smart bet to assume that half of your audience will be on mobile, and so you should design your project accordingly. Developing for an array of screen resolutions is called responsive design, and there are two major workflows: mobile-first and desktop-first. Traditionally, designs begin at desktop size and are then scaled down for mobile, but this often means that mobile support is an afterthought and it's often problematic to shrink down large elements later on. Mobile-first design starts at the smallest possible size and scales up, which is often easier as you get the more difficult versions of the site designed first and out of the way, and you can let things grow as screen resolution increases. Whether you need to do either depends on your audience — it's quite possible it predominantly uses one platform or the other, reducing the need to accommodate both; again, check your analytics. That said, while ensuring things work well cross-device and crossbrowser takes a lot of additional work, it should be a standard of excellence that you strive towards as you create things for broader consumption. Copyright @ 2016. Packt Publishing. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/18/2019 2:17 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES AN: 1364679 ; Kirk, Andy.; Data Visualization: Representing Information on Modern Web Account: undeloan.main.ehostDesigning Good Data Visualizations [ 484 ] If creating a mobile-first design, take out some paper and a black marker and draw a bunch of phone-sized shapes. Draw squares where you want each user-interface element (buttons, dropdown boxes, radio buttons, and so on) or chart to go — how you distinguish each element from the others is entirely up to you, just make sure that whatever vocabulary you use is shared by those you work with. You don't need to be super artistic with it, just be detailed enough to express how you think each user interaction (clicking/tapping, swiping, dragging, and so on) should feel within the project. Sketch out roughly how you think each element should flow on the different devices. Then do the same for a larger desktop screen size. A rough drawing versus the finished page. Prototypes are meant to be discussion pieces you can use to solicit feedback from colleagues and refine throughout the development process. Don't worry if the end result looks nothing like your original sketches, or if (like me) you can't draw a straight line to save your life. If possible, run your pen-and-paper prototypes past a few people to see whether your user interactions feel natural. Some principles for designing for mobile and desktop Mobile and desktop computing differ in some key ways, and understanding these is crucial for building data visualizations that are effective on both platforms. Mobile: • Has multiple screen orientations. • Has uniformly-small screen dimensions. • Does not have a pointer; interaction is derived from touch gestures. There is no "hover" state. • Relies on often inconsistent data availability. Copyright @ 2016. Packt Publishing. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/18/2019 2:17 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES AN: 1364679 ; Kirk, Andy.; Data Visualization: Representing Information on Modern Web Account: undeloan.main.ehostChapter 7 [ 485 ] • Has significantly less computing power than comparable laptops. • Keyboard is visible on-screen when in use; it is not used for navigation. Desktop: • Generally has only one screen orientation. • Has variably-large screen dimensions (and is often connected to huge screens). • Uses a pointer (and keyboard) to interact. The "hover" state is usable. • Generally has reliable data availability • Has significantly more computational power than comparable phones and tablets. • Keyboard can be used without impacting what's visible on the screen; additionally, can be used for navigation. I really don't have the space to go into a full course about how to do responsive design right here, but a few basic principles to keep in mind will get you started. Columns are for desktops, rows are for mobile On some level, it's fairly safe to assume that most people will view your work in portrait mode on mobile. This means that you effectively have one column, and every element in your one column is in a full row extending perpendicularly to the column's direction. Paragraphs should always flow vertically in a single column (instead of in multiple columns positioned left to right), and it's not an awful idea to rotate bar charts 90º so that your bars aren't squished together in one narrow horizontal row. Much like the WSJ lottery probabilities graphic above, make sure use of the infinite vertical space you have to scroll. On desktop, however, a single paragraph spanning the entire horizontal width of the display is very hard to read, as it requires the eye to move back and forth quite a lot. Using columns is often preferable, as it not only makes better use of the horizontal space, but it also improves readability. Form elements in particular often look much better when grouped into columns. The good news is that Flexbox makes it really easy to switch the orientation of groups of elements, provided you don't have to support older versions of Internet Explorer. If you aren't using flexbox already, take the effort to do so — it will make your life so much easier (at least, once you figure out how to use it). Copyright @ 2016. Packt Publishing. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/18/2019 2:17 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES AN: 1364679 ; Kirk, Andy.; Data Visualization: Representing Information on Modern Web Account: undeloan.main.ehostDesigning Good Data Visualizations [ 486 ] Want to learn flexbox the fun way? Try out Flexbox Froggy, a game that teaches you how to position elements using Flexbox and Frogs. http://flexboxfroggy.com/. Still find flexbox hideously frustrating? You're in good company. Try out Flexbox Grid, which uses Twitter Bootstrap-like classes to create responsive grids using flexbox. http://flexboxgrid.com/. Be sparing with animations on mobile Animation on mobile is really tricky, not only because you have reduced graphics processing power, but also because scroll events have traditionally messed with JavaScript execution timing. If you don't totally disable animation on mobile, try to only use CSS transitions, as these are more performant than iterating through properties via JavaScript. When in doubt, disable animation on mobile. Realize similar UI elements react differently between platforms Things like radio buttons, sliders, and checkboxes are available both on mobile and desktop, but some are easier to use on mobile than others. In general, web browsers draw all of these elements slightly too small for comfort on most mobile devices. Where possible (for instance, select dropdowns), make individual form elements stretch the entire device width on mobile, or in the case of things such as checkboxes and radio buttons, use the for property of the <label> element to make labels tapable and scale these horizontally. Avoid "mystery meat" navigation Pointer-based devices have the benefit of being able to use the cursor's "hover" state to reveal information (for instance, labels on buttons). While this can allow for more minimalist-looking interfaces on desktop, it's a really terrible anti-pattern referred to as "mystery meat navigation" when on mobile. When you hover over a button, you're not committing to clicking it. However, because mobile devices lack a hover state, users must commit to a user interaction to understand what a button actually does. Given how slow the mobile reading experience can be, users tend to be a lot more cautious before committing to any action that might cause the page to reload. Copyright @ 2016. Packt Publishing. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/18/2019 2:17 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES AN: 1364679 ; Kirk, Andy.; Data Visualization: Representing Information on Modern Web Account: undeloan.main.ehostChapter 7 [ 487 ] The solution is simple: unless using incredibly clear iconography, label your buttons on mobile. For some good mobile icons, try Font Awesome (https:// fortawesome.github.io/Font-Awesome/) and Google's Material Icons (https://design.google.com/icons). Be wary of the scroll A common user interaction idiom on desktop (popularized by the New York Times' "Snowfall" long-form piece) is to tie animations to the browser's scroll event. This is frequently fraught with peril on mobile, because scrolling triggers a memoryintensive redraw that often blocks JavaScript execution. While newer mobile operating systems handle this better than before (I'm looking mainly at you, iOS), it's often unsafe to assume that a scroll-dependent animation will play properly and not feel non-performant and "janky" on mobile. Again, this has improved quite a lot with newer devices, but it's still never a bad idea to tie animation states to tap events (possibly delivered via a button) on mobile. Summary Hopefully by now, you feel like you have a secure understanding of the work you want to do using D3 to visualize data. We went through some examples and laid some good ground rules for building high-quality data visualizations that not only inform an audience, but also look pretty spectacular while doing so. We also discussed how to make sure your work functions well on mobile. In the next chapter, we'll tie things up by helping you feel more confident with the visualizations you produce by using type checking and automated testing to ensure that nothing goes wonky at the worst possible time. Stay tuned… Copyright @ 2016. Packt Publishing. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/18/2019 2:17 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES AN: 1364679 ; Kirk, Andy.; Data Visualization: Representing Information on Modern Web Account: undeloan.main.ehostCopyright @ 2016. Packt Publishing. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/18/2019 2:17 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES AN: 1364679 ; Kirk, Andy.; Data Visualization: Representing Information on Modern Web Account: undeloan.main.ehost