Supporting the Creative Designer 101 ABSTRACT: In thinking of a solution to a problem, the designer has a vague image of the form that will embody the solution. Creating collages, sketches and other types of (external) visual representations are used to help in shaping and establishing this image. For this, designers make extensive use of design precedents. Many of the existing computer tools to support designing with precedents suffer from a serious drawback: they rely on textual descriptions that have to be added to the collection of images prior to using the system. This approach brings along a series of difficulties: it is impractical for large collections; considers only the viewpoint of the editor; fixes descriptions in time and restricts attribution of meaning. This chapter presents an approach that eliminates the human mediated description, indexing and organizing of large collections of design precedents. It explores both theoretical and technological aspects of the use and handling of design precedents. On the theoretical side, it discusses questions related to how to represent design precedents in such a way that they can be effectively used in design education and in design practice. On the technological side, it shows how to implement such representations in a computer program so that it eliminates the problems associated with human mediated indexing and description. 5 G i ve me a n E x amp l e : S u p p o r t i n g t h e Cr e a t i ve D e s i g n e r 5.1 Introduction Creativity is not only the creation of completely new, innovative solutions to a problem. It also comprises the adequate use of existing knowledge in new situations. This is particularly significant in design. In product design, the level of newness at form and usage level has decreased over the years. Innovation is more visible at sub-system and component level and in manufacturing processes (Pugh, 1990). Palh and Beitz (1996) suggested that the type of product determines the type of design activity. They proposed three types of design activities: original, variant and adaptive design. In original design, new and original solutions are proposed for new or old problems; the distinguishing factor is that it involves a new solution principle. In variant design, the function and solution principle remain the same. Only sizes, materials or arrangement of an existing solution are changed, whereas in adaptive design, a known solution is adapted to a new or changed task. The solution principle typically remains the same, but original design of parts, components or assemblies are generally required. Design re-use (which maps to variant and adaptive design) has become a major concern in the design research community. Many systems to support Copyright @ 2004. Delft University Press. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. 102 Information Processing in Design design re-use have been developed. The objective of those systems is to store the design rationale along with the results of a design process so aspects of both the process and the solution can be re-used. This type of information, which contains details of the solution principles, parts, components, materials, assembly and manufacturing processes, etc. can act as precedents in a design process. However, in this chapter we will concentrate on other, less detailed type of precedents that are typically used by the designer in the form creation process: Images of existing products. Why Using Precedents? In thinking of a solution to a problem, the designer has a vague image of the form that will embody the solution. Creating collages, sketches and other types of (external) visual representations are used to help in shaping and establishing this image. When making collages, for instance, the designer needs just one image that represents a concept, but often he does not know himself what image it will be. On many occasions, designers simply flick through magazines or image databases: as one of the designers that participated in our studies said, “searching for something you cannot describe”, trying to find the precedent that carries the kind of knowledge needed to formalize the idea. This visual thinking and visualization of ideas is a process that is inherent to conceptualizing solutions in form and material (Muller, 2001; Goldschmidt, 1991; Schön, 1983, 1992). At this stage of the design process, visual information is preferred over linguistic information for it fits better the designers’ way of thinking. The designer knows, thinks and works in a visual way (Cross, 1982). Using images of existing products, as well as physical samples, is a common way of exploring possible solutions. Precedents, being solutions to previous similar problems, provide the designer with the frames of reference for the generation and development of new product forms, and using them is an important aspect of design practice (Pasman, 2003). In fact, many design studios have their own repository of samples of materials, physical objects, videos, glossy magazines, etc. Designers actively use these elements as sources of knowledge, to generate an image of the possible solution space, to get an impression of modes, styles, trends, applications of materials and production/assembly techniques, or just as sources of inspiration (Ashby and Johnson, 2002; Restrepo et al, 2004 and Chapter 2 of this book). These collections of precedents form a domain-specific knowledge base that aids the designer in the form creation process in a way different from formal rationality. Formal rationality proposes that knowledge can be put into a collection of abstract, generally applicable principles as in, for example, mathematics and physics. In these disciplines, knowing certain abstract rules that can be applied to a great number of different situations eliminates the need for learning how to resolve every imaginable situation (which would be impractical, if not impossible). This is the reasoning that inspired Altschuller’s theory of technical problem solving TRIZ (Altschuller, 1984, 1996). Knowledge, however, comprises more than generally applicable rules. It can also consist of concrete, specific experiences. Generally applicable rules suit domains with well-defined problems. In creative design, where problems are ill-defined, such general rules are either not always applicable, or completely non-existent. Instead, transfer Copyright @ 2004. Delft University Press. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. Supporting the Creative Designer 103 of knowledge is based on cases (Spiro et al, 1987), making precedents very important in design education. In design education, precedents are used in a number of different ways. For instance, to illustrate the results of using certain materials or manufacturing processes, to compare differences in styles or design movements or to discuss the effects of changing the spatial relations among components, to monitor trends, or as sources of knowledge and inspiration . (Schön, 1988; Oxman, 1990, Ashby and Johnson, 2002). All the knowledge encoded in these precedents is decoded and transferred by the designer to the current situation. Kuhn (1977) called this process ‘thinking from exemplars’. However, in spite of being critical to design, the process of transferring knowledge from precedents to current design situations is still poorly understood and poorly supported. Many researchers have developed systems that allow designers to search for precedents in image databases with the objective of supporting this process. In most of these initiatives, images of products are stored in collections along with textual descriptions of them. This metadata is later used by the system as an index to filter the data during a particular query. This filtering approach can be sufficient if the designer has a good idea of what to search for (a keyword is usually necessary) and if the search criteria are well defined, e.g., if the designer is interested in vacuum cleaners, tigers, vehicles or applications of certain materials. However, the search criteria cannot always be expressed in such a straightforward manner. In addition to their use as a means to explore possible solutions, as a source of knowledge and as a source of inspiration, precedents are used as referents in the codification of messages that have to be transmitted by a product. For instance, if a designer intends to design a product that looks sturdy, sportive or elegant to a certain social group, salient characteristics of other products that are considered sturdy, sportive or elegant by that social group serve as a starting point for the exploration of new forms. This exercise requires not only a good understanding of the codes to be used, but also access to a large number of referents (e.g. products containing those codes). In this case, the filtering approach is no longer adequate. The reason is that images (or what they represent) do not have an intrinsic, fixed meaning that can be completely captured in words by the editor of an image collection. Instead, as will be discussed throughout this chapter, the meaning of an image is characterized by three factors: It is contextual, it is differential and it is situational (Santini et al 2000). From these reflections, two research questions can be proposed. One, how to represent design precedents in such a way that they can be effectively used in design education and in design practice?. Two, how to implement such representations in a computer program in such a way that it eliminates the problems associated with human mediated indexing and description?. In the next sections both technological and theoretical aspects of handling design precedents will be discussed. Firstly, current research initiatives are reviewed in the light of the approach they take to represent precedents. Secdissertation.Copyright @ 2004. Delft University Press. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. 104 Information Processing in Design ondly, some aspects associated with the processes of meaning attribution and image interpretation are discussed. Then follows a description of a system that uses a “query by example” approach to support the use of precedents in design. Finally, the results of a series of studies in which the system was tested with 46 senior design students are presented, and the implications for the future development of similar computer tools are discussed. 5.2 Computational Support for Precedents The practice of collecting design precedents has existed even before the arrival of computers. For instance, a well-known collection of precedents is the collection of buildings compiled by Durand (1800). In this collection, images are drawn in standard projections and are presented without any comment. More recently, Clarck and Pause (1996) presented a collection of precedents together with analytical diagrams to be used in education and Schneider (1994) published a collection of floor plans intended for professional architects. There are also several publications with design examples; for instance, the 1000 chairs book (Fiell et al 2000) or the design magazines T3 and Items. Though designers have made prolific use of these collections, as well as their own personal ones, there are several powerful reasons for wanting computer support for them. The institutionalization of knowledge the most obvious one, but there are others. If the designer is for instance composing a collage to construct an impression of style features, kinds of forms, colors, materials, textures, etc., finding the right images can be a difficult, time consuming task, even if they are organized in catalogues like the ones previously mentioned. Several researchers have considered the issue and tried out alternative solutions. For instance, Muller and Pasman (1996) created a database with design precedents that was organized following a typological structure (extensively discussed in Muller, 2001). Their argument is that when images are organized into categories that follow a typological structure, images that share certain salient characteristics are put together and “because of the mutual characteristics of the images in the field, the knowledge that is embodied in this typification will become explicit” (p.124). The difficulty using their system is that if images are organized in such a preestablished structure, the editor/maintainer has to determine beforehand which categories to use and has to organize the images accordingly. Browsing through such a structure becomes increasingly tedious as the designer moves deeper into the lower level of the structure. For instance, if a designer wants to have examples of organic products, he has to know that it is an ordering feature of an element called shape within a dimension called plasticity. Additionally, as they concluded themselves, this organization of the images in categories is difficult to achieve and requires significant expertise. Oxman and Oxman (1993, 1994) developed a system called memorabilia, which is a database with examples of important architectural designs. In this system, images of buildings are stored along with ‘design stories’, which are a description of the aspects that make those buildings significant. The texts are taken from architecture magazines and books and the index of the database is Copyright @ 2004. Delft University Press. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. Supporting the Creative Designer 105 the lexicon used in the texts. Ashby (2003) tried a similar approach, but this time using images of products from a design magazine. The images were indexed with the adjectives used in the magazine to describe the product. The limitation of this method is that it considers only the point of view of the editor of those books or magazines. A more sophisticated way to store architectural precedents was developed by Fleming and Aygen (2001). Their system, called SEED, allows the retrieval of precedents in two ways. One, as a prototype, with standard properties that apply across projects. For example, a kitchen and the space requirements typically associated with it. The other as a case, representing a specific solution for a given set of requirements. This latter way of storing/retrieving precedents is closer to a formal Case Based Reasoning system (CBR), as the intention is to store the design rationale along with the images. The former method proposes prototypical solutions to certain well-formed problems. As it has been discussed previously, well-formed problems are rarely encountered early in the design process. Other tools like the Electronic Design Assistance Tool EDAT described by Akin et al (1997a), DYNAMO presented by Heylighen and Neuckermans (2000) or the CDAT by Vroom (2003) are closer to conventional Content Management Systems (CMS) than to specific tools to support designers in looking for design precedents. In all these systems, the user has the responsibility of maintaining the information in the system, which could be anything from simple texts to multimedia content. The user not only has to generate the content, but also the metadata to describe, index and retrieve it. These systems provide means to catalogue and organize information, but do not offer special support for retrieving it. Research conducted by Nakakoji et al (1999) resulted in the development of IAM-eMMa and EVIDII, two tools whose objective is supporting designers in finding visual images that would be useful for their creative design task. IAMeMMa uses knowledge-based rules constructed by other designers to retrieve images related to a design task. That is, one designer describes his design using aspect-value pairs, that acted as ‘requirements’ during the design process. Aspects can be “atmosphere, audience, media, objects, etc.” Possible values for each aspect are defined by the designer of the system beforehand. The EVIDII system allows designers to browse through images according to associations of those images to adjectives like ‘warm, refreshing or pretty’ put in the system by the editors of the collection. The difficulty of using these systems lies in the fact that they rely not only on fixed associations between images and adjectives, but also on pre-determined rules to set design requirements. In the example given by Nakakoji et al (p.169), “atmosphere” can only be described using four different adjectives: “cheerful, warm, sad and cold”. While this simplifies the indexing process of the images, it also significantly restricts the possibilities of generating different interpretations. Pasman and Stappers (2001) also decided to let the users describe the precedents themselves. In ProductWorld, the users have to store, organize, index and retrieve the images. Using an interactive interface, the user gives to the Copyright @ 2004. Delft University Press. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. 106 Information Processing in Design system a set of images and organizes them by similarity. Then, the user has to assign a label to each set of samples. However, the actual process of populating the system, grouping, labeling and indexing the samples is so intensive and time consuming that it becomes impractical for large collections. The authors reported, though, that this process provided valuable insight to the students that participated in the testing of the system, suggesting that it would be suitable for use in design education. A system that does not use language as metadata is the Iconic Browser (Tsuda, 1989). The idea is to use icons (from a limited collection) to describe images. Later, the user would use the same collection of icons instead of keywords to search the database. The same query by icon approach was used later by Aslondgan et al (1995) The development of a pen based drawing environment (Gross, 1996) allowed searching for images in architectural databases in a different way. The user makes rough sketches of buildings that show the main relation between the buildings components and attaches these to the image of the building. Instead of using texts or icons, the image is then described by a sketch. When the user needs to search for an image, all that needs to be done is a sketch representing what has to be sought. The system then tries to match the sketch drawn to the sketches stored in the database (Yi-Luen Do, 1998). But then again, it is necessary to describe the information in the database using sketches. This approach is called query by sketch. These last two approaches purport to escape the difficulties brought along with the use of language for indexing images. By using icons or sketches, it is only possible to conduct a search based exclusively on a limited set of geometrical features, and still needs additions by a user. These metadata do not provide sufficient detail to search on a full set of geometrical features, like texture, color or spatial relations. All systems discussed so far require the addition of metadata to the images in the form of ‘design stories’ (Oxman, 1994, Ashby, 2003), affective associations (Nakakoji et al, 1999), requirements (Fleming and Aygen, 2001), icons (Tsuda, 1989; Aslondgan et al, 1995) or sketches (Yi-Luen Do, 1998); or need to be classified within a predetermined structure to browse through (Muller and Pasman, 1996; Clarck and Pause, 1996; Schenider, 1994). These approaches have some serious drawbacks. The first drawback is a practical one. To be useful, a database with precedents has to have a significant amount of images. Describing and indexing each image is a time consuming, labor intensive, expensive task. The second drawback is related to the way images are understood and interpreted. Attribution of meaning is very personal, subjective and situational and can hardly be determined beforehand by the editor of a collection. These shortcomings could very well be the reason why none of these initiatives have left the research environment to become a successful commercial product. The high costs associated with the indexing of the data and the amount of maintenance required to keep it up to date, are major obstacles for the assimilation of these technologies in industry. Copyright @ 2004. Delft University Press. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. Supporting the Creative Designer 107 The next section briefly sketches some theoretical aspects regarding attribution of meaning and their implications in the design of a system to handle design precedents. 5.3 Attribution of Meaning Meaning cannot be derived entirely from the content of the image. The interpretation of an image is not based exclusively on matching patterns stored in our memory, as when we recognize a cat, a chair or a car, but on other factors: we recognize an angora cat, an elegant chair or a sports car. This attribution of meaning is rooted in complex cultural and social conventions. This implies that the relation between the signifier and the signified proposed by Saussure (1988) cannot stand alone, it can only exist in a system of oppositions and differences. In a similar way to linguistic signs (words), meaning emerges when the sign (the icon, the word or the image) forms part of a system; when it is placed in a context. The meaning of an image is differential. That is, it becomes more evident by comparing it with other images that share common characteristics with it. Consider for instance the images presented in Figure 20. On the left side, a bicycle is depicted along with other images, some of which are bicycles and some of which are not. In this context, the bicycle suggests ‘means of transportation’. However, if the same image is placed in a different context, it suggests a means of recreation. In a collection of images, the metadata used to describe the images cannot be fixed, for the way products are perceived changes with time. The meaning and interpretation of a product can change due to changes in its use, e.g., a mobile phone was a communication device, now it is a gadget with games and video cameras, or a fashion accessory, as in the new Nokia wearable phone Medallion II (Nokia, 2004). Figure 20 The image is interpreted in the context in which it is placed. Left, the bicycle is a transportation mean whereas in the right, it denotes recreation. Copyright @ 2004. Delft University Press. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. 108 Information Processing in Design The way a product is interpreted can also change due to changes in other products imitating or opposing it, or changes in technology, materials, etc. For instance, when plastic products were no longer a technological miracle (because any company could produce them), they began to be perceived as cheap and ordinary. Only when companies could produce microtextures, transparent and matte plastics in the nineties, were they able to become exclusive again, such as the kitchenware by Authentics. The implication is that the metadata added to the images in a collection of precedents has to be dynamic. It also means that the collection has to be continuously updated and maintained. These observations have significant consequences for the design of systems using precedents. Using some intrinsically determined meaning to index and retrieve the information from the database, as in all of the systems previously discussed , does not support the contextual, differential and situational character of meaning attribution. Using a filtering approach is, therefore, not an appropriate option. This motivated the development of a system that uses a Content Base Image Retrieval (CBIR) approach for searching and indexing. 5.4 Developing a QBE System to Handle Design Precedents A review of the current research on information systems to support the use of precedents in design has demonstrated the difficulties inherent to the process of describing and representing precedents adequately. Subjectivity, inflexibility, high maintenance costs and the dependence of expert knowledge are amongst the problems mentioned. A system that does not require a previous description of the data it contains (metadata) would need to be aware of the content of the information it processes. Recognizing the content and retrieving text documents based on content and not on metadata is a most demanding task. But if the document is an image, then we are referring to one of the most formidable challenges of modern computer science: Content Based Image Retrieval Systems (CBIRS) (Müller, 2001) In a CBIRS, the system would automatically create a low level representation of the images it contains. This representation is based exclusively on properties of the image, such as color, texture, shape, spatial relationships, etc. However, the system cannot map this low level representation to the full semantics of the image. Even recognizing that the image contains a TV, a car or a phone, i.e., recognizing a small part of the semantics, is still an unresolved problem. If CBIRS are still so immature, how can they contribute to the issue of indexing and retrieving precedents in design? The answer is twofold. First, CBIRS allow the automatic creation of a low level representation of the image that is used for indexing purposes. Second, this representation, being based exclusively on properties of the image, is culturally independent and does not represent any particular point of view. In a CBIRS, the search is done using a seed that, in contrast with other systems, is not based on language. If a user needs an image, all that is required is to feed the system with an image that resembles Copyright @ 2004. Delft University Press. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. Supporting the Creative Designer 109 what the user is looking for. This approach is called query by example (QBE) The next section presents a series of studies whose main objectives are to: • explore different ways of (automatically) representing design precedents • test the suitability of the QBE approach to handle large collections of design precedents • learn about the criteria used by the designers to assess the relevance of the visual material used during the design process • design a proof-of-concept system for research and demonstration purposes. The three studies were planned as follows: The first one tests the suitability of the technology, queries the manner in which designers describe visual information and provides information for the design of better interfaces for the system. In the second study, an improved version of the interface is tested. This study discusses the usability problems of the interface and proposes ways to improve the system. For the third study, the interface and the content of the database are revised. With an improved, fully functional research tool, the focus of this study is on the criteria used to determine the relevance of the collected material. Finally, a general discussion on the results and the possible application of the technology to design education are presented along with a series of recommendations for further development of the system. 5.5 Fourth Study: Testing the QBE Approach Besides testing the suitability of a QBE approach to access large collections of design precedents, the intention of this study was to learn how designers decide on the images they use an on what basis these images are selected. With this objective in mind, a study was set up in which a number of (student) designers were asked to compose a collage for a particular design assignment using a proof-of-concept QBE system. This section describes this study and presents and discusses the results. 5.5.1 The QBE System The selection of a CBIRS is a difficult task. Most of the existing systems are either commercial products developed for specific applications (such as airport security) and therefore expensive and not suitable for more general applications, or are immature developments product of research at university level, and therefore difficult to implement. Besides conditions such as accuracy and use of adequate image recognition algorithms, there are other requirements such as performance and ability to handle large collections. In addition, it is also a condition that the system follows a client-server architecture. This would allow the separation of the server code that does the indexing, the image recognition and the actual retrieval, and from the Graphic User Interface (GUI). It was also a requirement that the communication layer between the client and the server is open so new GUI’s are easily developed. Copyright @ 2004. Delft University Press. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. 110 Information Processing in Design The system selected complies with most of these characteristics. It is serverclient oriented, the communication layer between client and server is XML based and it is possible to extend its capabilities by adding user defined plug-ins. This allows for testing different interfaces without having to modify the server code. The first time the technology was tested in our laboratory was using a very simple HTML based client written in PHP, based largely on the PHP interface written by Nicolas Chabloz, a student of the Computer Vision and Multimedia Laboratory at the University of Geneva. The simplicity of the interface means that it was necessary to greatly compromise the interactivity: the way of giving feed back to the system was difficult and the overall appearance was not appealing to our first pilot participants (13 in total). A Java based interface written by Zoran Pe.enovic and Wolfgang Müller, also from the Computer Vision and Multimedia Laboratory at the University of Geneva, called the SnakeCharmer, was then installed and tested with three pilot participants. This interface was the one used for this study (see Figure 21). This section will not report on the results of the PHP tests. Only the studies conducted with the Java interface will be described. In this interface, the designer initially gets a random set of images by pressing the dices button in the toolbar. When a relevant image appears, the designer asks the system to find similar images. This is done by using the include entry in the contextual menu (right clicking over the image). This is called giving posi- Figure 21 Screenshot of the Snake Charmer Interface showing a query on the Corel 6100 collection. Copyright @ 2004. Delft University Press. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. Supporting the Creative Designer 111 tive feedback. All the irrelevant images, those containing undesired features are marked using the exclude entry in the contextual menu. This is called giving negative feedback. All the relevant images that appear can be stored in a personal collection using the Add to basket entry. It is also possible to browse through the search history. For this study, a collection of 3,000 images of products was compiled. About 1,000 of those images came from the collection of designed products at the faculty if IDE (the collection that today belongs to the Henri Baudet Institute). Another 1,000 from the IDE Virtual Design Museum and the rest from various internet sources. The only way the designers could access those images was via the Query by Example interface. That is, there was no browsing mechanism and it was not possible to search using keywords. 5.5.2 Participants The participants in this study were 12 senior students from the faculty of Industrial Design Engineering (IDE) at Delft University of Technology (8 male 66%, 4 female 33%) that participated voluntarily from a group of 45 students that were contacted by e-mail. The selected participants were chosen based on their performance on the course Design Project 4. They were invited to our laboratory, one at a time, to work on a small design assignment and to hold an interview. They received a small present as a reward for their cooperation in the study. 5.5.3 The Design Assignment In order to test how different designers would use the system to collect visual information, they were asked to design a product. The assignment was formulated as the design of a telephone for young, highly educated people living in west Europe. The target group and the conditions were further explained by a text of about 300 words. This text indicated that the people in the target group have a lot of high tech equipment in their work environment and that for the house, they would like something more sober, elegant yet modern. The participants were asked to compose a collage that expressed the character they wanted to give to their product. No further instructions were given, so they had the freedom to compose a collage that illustrated the target group, that served a starting point for an exploration of form, color, materials, or whatever other use they could think for a collage. They were asked to collect at least ten images, with no maximum limit. For the task of collecting images, they were given 30 minutes. 5.5.4 Procedure The study was conducted in one and a half hour sessions. Each participant spent 30 minutes working on the assignment. There was a 30 minutes interview and the other half an hour was spent in introducing the study and training the participant in the use of the system. The participants were invited, one at a time, to our laboratory. A computer was set up with the software, a table with sketchdissertation.Copyright @ 2004. Delft University Press. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. 112 Information Processing in Design ing material (markers, paper, etc) and video camera that was used to tape all activities. The camera was aimed at the computer screen and recorded the remarks of the participants. The session started with a short introduction in which the participants were informed about the activities. Then, each participant received a short demonstration of how to use the system. Following this they were given a small training assignment. They were asked to make a collection of five images that they considered related to each other in whatever way. They were also asked what the relation was. In this way, the participant was forced to think about certain criteria to use in the searches. For instance, they could search products with the same geometry, the same color, the same function, etc. (this was not suggested during the experiment, and is mentioned here for illustration purposes only). For this task, the participants had 10 minutes. After this training, the assignment was given and they started working. For the collection of images to compose the collage the participants were allowed 30 minutes. During this time, they could make notes and sketches. They were also asked to indicate why they decided to give positive or negative feedback to particular images or why they wanted to add them to their personal collections. These protocols were later used to determine what criteria they used to judge the images. Each time the participant performed an action, the action and the time stamp was noted in a log book. This logbook was used later to search the tapes for those segments of particular interest. Finally, all the participants were interviewed. During the interview they were asked about their experience with search engines, their perception of the software in general and the interface in particular and the content of the collection. They were also asked for what purposes they would use such a system. This interview took about half an hour per participant 5.5.6 Collection and Analysis of the Data The participants were videotaped and the tapes were fully transcribed. In order to determine in what manner designers talk and describe the pictures they consider during their actions, all utterances were tabulated. Afterwards, three researchers, including this author, observed independently the list of utterances and classified them into categories. No list of topics was given as a starting point. The opinions of the three researchers were compared and differences in opinion were discussed. After agreement, each utterance was put in one of the categories. Table 17 presents some examples of the results. The possible actions a participant could perform with an image were: • Include. This was giving an image as example for the search (first image) or using images from the results to give positive feed back to the program. • Exclude. When the participant uses an image from the results to give negative feedback to the system, indicating that this sort of image should not appear furthering the results. Copyright @ 2004. Delft University Press. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. Supporting the Creative Designer 113 • Search. Pressing the search button after having composed a query • Add. When the participant considers that an image from the results could be useful and therefore saves it in the personal collection area. The assessment of the interface and the assessment of the potential of the technology was done by observing the use of the software. All incorrect uses of the functions of the interface were marked, including those not mentioned or not noticed by the participants. During the experiment, the researchers made notes on some of these problems and later asked the participants questions about them. Participants were also given enough room to discuss/propose issues they considered important about the software during the interviews. Due to a problem with the videotape, the data of participant 9 could not be analyzed. 5.5.7 Results One of the expectations when this study was set was that the designers would use a rich vocabulary for describing the images. They were asked to make clear what the reasons were for their actions (including, excluding and adding images). This was unfortunately not the case. On the contrary, very few reasons were given for the actions over the images, limiting to a maximum of one per image and in some cases, not even that. If the non-specific utterances are removed, the ratio is even lower. (see table 18). All participants, with exception of 3, 7, and 11, gave one or less than one reason per image. This is illustrated in table 18. Note that when the non-specific utterances are not considered, the ratio of utterances per image is significantly reduced. When the participants selected images without mentioning a particular reason, the researchers asked about it. Often, they could not give an immediate answer, Category Example of utterance Function I do not want a chair; is not a product for in house use, this is a telephone, I do not want more bikes, no watches, etc. Color appropriate color, sharp color, too colorful, boring white, etc. Material/Texture smooth, shiny, slimmer, chromed, because of the material, material makes it elegant, etc. Form rigid, stony, (not) organic, angular, awkward form, rounded, flat, simple, geometrical, rectangular, form not too bad, etc. Time old-fashioned, passé, (not) classic, antique, trendy and modern, etc. Style elegant, sober, stylish, sporty, hi-tech, expensive, funny, boring, fancy, groggy, trendy, fluid, robust, too high tech, etc. Non-specific Looks good, for the contrast, hmmm, nice, too intense, this thing we should not have, this is not, this is not it, interesting, etc. Table 17 Summary of the utterances organized by category (with examples of the utterances) Copyright @ 2004. Delft University Press. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. 114 Information Processing in Design and had to think about it for a few moments. This occurred particularly in the first half of the assignment. This suggests that the selection of the images is very intuitive, and that verbalizing the intentions is difficult. It is perhaps for this reason that the participants found the QBE approach promising: Not having to use language to formulate the queries eased the task. One of them (participant 3) mentioned that “it was difficult to start, we had some keywords from the assignment, but finding products that represent what we want was not easy”. Other participant said that “I do not really know what I am after, but I could see that this image belongs to the assignment”. Initially, the descriptions of the images were vague or non-existent. Most of the utterances were “I do not think this fits with the others” or “hmmm, nice” and came in most cases after the researcher asked for the reasons for an action. Only participants 3, 7 and 11 consistently gave reasons without intervention of the researcher. Towards the end, the non-specific utterances became less common. This can be observed in the last column of table 18. When only the second half of the assignment is considered, almost all participants have a utterance/image ratio above 1. 5.5.8 Discussion of the Results The objectives of this study were threefold: To test the technology, to learn about the designers’ criteria to select design precedents and to lay out a list or requirements for the development of a new interface. Participant Nº of Images Nº of Utterances U/I U/I (w/o non specific) Total U/I (w/o non specific) 1st half U/I (w/o non specific) 2nd half 1 19 19 1 0.68 0.33 1 2 25 26 1.04 1 0.46 1.24 3 25 44 1.76 1.28 0.75 1.52 4 44 29 0.66 0.64 0.07 0.77 5 29 33 1.14 1.03 0.21 1.24 6 32 34 1.06 1.06 0.37 1.25 7 34 54 1.59 1.12 0.57 1.29 8 54 38 0.7 0.65 0.28 0.76 10 38 30 0.79 0.71 0.63 0.87 11 30 41 1.37 1.37 0.81 1.57 12 41 25 0.61 0.59 0.49 0.73 Mean 33.73 33.91 1.07 0.92 0.45 1.11 sd 9.98 9.88 0.38 0.28 0.23 0.30 Table 18. Number of images considered, number of utterances and number of utterances per image. U/I = Utterances per image during the first and second half of the test. Copyright @ 2004. Delft University Press. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. Supporting the Creative Designer 115 Suitability of the QBE Approach Regarding the first objective, the results are promising. It was possible to test the automatic indexing, using low level representations of 3,000 pictures of products, and to get usable results. Although there were difficulties with the use of the system, due to the multiple technological difficulties with the existing interface, all the participants could get collections of images that they considered were usable for their design assignment. In this first sections of this chapter it was claimed that in the initial stages of the form creation process, the designer has a vague image of the form that will embody the solution. Often, due to this vagueness, it is even difficult to externalize that mental image in the form of a sketch. Designers then resort to images of existing products that have the special characteristic that is sought. As one of our participants said, “I do not really know what I am after, but I could see that this image belongs to the assignment”. If sketching is difficult, verbalizing is even more difficult. This was clear in the study: in the beginning it was not even possible for our participants to express why a certain image was considered as relevant or not. Presenting the designer with a tool that does not require the verbalization that is necessary when searching with keywords is a significant aid. If an image is considered relevant, it can be used to search similar images, containing the same features. Selection Criteria The reason to study the selection criteria is twofold. First, to give insight into the form creation process. As the designer progresses in this process, different Participant Criteria Total Style Form Function Time Material Color Unclear 1 2 2 1 6 1 1 6 19 2 6 3 2 3 8 3 1 26 3 17 14 1 12 44 4 5 14 1 8 1 29 5 11 3 7 7 1 1 3 33 6 10 13 8 1 2 34 7 18 10 4 1 4 1 16 54 8 7 10 4 12 2 3 38 10 1 6 8 7 1 4 3 30 11 15 6 2 8 6 4 41 12 1 7 12 4 1 25 Total 93 88 48 51 25 22 46 373 Table 19 Frequency of the utterances per category Copyright @ 2004. Delft University Press. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. 116 Information Processing in Design aspects of the images become relevant. Second, it provides information for the design of improved search algorithms. Image recognition is based on a number of features, mostly geometry, texture, spatial distribution and color. Insight into the criteria used to select images can be used to write better algorithms that are particularly suitable for designers. For instance, color is a predominant feature in CBIR systems. Color blocks, color histograms and texture analysis using Gabor filters are common strategies used in calculating the similarity of images. However, as it can be seen in table 19 color is the less used criterion. Most of the reasons used fall in the ‘style’ group. CBIRS are based exclusively on the visual content of the image, and not on the semantics. Even recognizing a small part of the semantics, such as recognizing if it is a car or a pram is still very difficult. Could it be that products with similar geometries can be classified within the same style?. This question is still unanswered. Other criteria used, such as form and function, are more easy to exploit in CBIRS, as many products with similar functions share formal characteristics. What is considered a great advantage of the QBE approach in the beginning of the design session, that it is not necessary to use language to formulate a query, becomes a hindrance latter in the process. There were moments in which the participants knew what they wanted and asked for an easier way to find it. For instance, they wanted to see telephones, or office appliances, but using queries with examples of telephones or desks did not produce the expected results. This caused frustration, as most of them are accustomed to a more straightforward method of searching: using keywords or navigating through categories. One surprising aspect of the results was the incredibly poor design vocabulary used by the participants. Having spent at least 4 or 5 years in an industrial design engineering program, it was expected that they would be using appropriate terms to describe the products they were working with. When interviewed, they could not explain their choices. For instance, we confronted some participants with their own utterances. During the interview, we showed them the video tape and ask why the said an image was ‘stony’ or had an ‘awkward form’. None of the 4 participants with which we did this could give a satisfactory account of their judgments. To us, it indicates that the choices and assessments are based more on their own experience as users of products than on design knowledge. The expectations were that they would explain naming a product as sportive with arguments such as the color or materials used, the streamlined profiles, etc. The codes in which product characteristics are ‘written’ in products could not be made explicit by any of them during the interviews. Suggestions for Improvement The system needs to be improved in three different ways: The content of the collection, the usability of the interface and the overall stability of the system. Regarding the first issue, the participants complained a lot about the completeness of the database. Since most of the images came from already compiled collections with specific purposes (cars, tools, household appliances) the diversity of the products was limited. Moreover, the IDE collection (depicting mostly classic designs from the 60’s and the 70’s) represented 25% of the total collection. Copyright @ 2004. Delft University Press. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. Supporting the Creative Designer 117 In the SnakeCharmer and the PHP interfaces, the participants had to press the random button several times before something they could use as a seed appeared. This was considered a serious shortcoming. Whilst the QBE approach provides an easy way to formulate a query once in possession of an example, the problem of how to provide the first example still remains. This problem has been described as the zero page problem (La Cascia et al, 1998). Query by Sketch could provide a way out of this problem. Another method would be to provide the user with an overview of what is in the database and then allow him to move through this overview (Müller, W.T.E., 2001). Regarding the interface, there are a number of aspects to be improved. The icons are not clear. Icons that are used in popular computer programs (such as the undo button) are used in this interface to clear the query. The ‘connect’ and the ‘random’ buttons needed to be explained several times. The function of the tabs is not clear. Many participants (5 out of 12) mentioned that a great improvement would be to have the query images and the results in the same view. Removing images from previous queries was considered very difficult. Since the query images were not visible at the same time as the results, it was difficult to keep track of the query history. The use of many different terms for the same function is confusing. For instance, in the contextual menu there is a function called ‘add to basket’ whereas the tab where the ‘basket’ is visible is called ‘your selection of images’. The use of the terms ‘include’ and ‘exclude’ to give positive and negative feedback were not readily understood. It was suggested to use metaphors commonly used in other computer programs, such as dragging and dropping images in a folder (instead of the ‘add to basket’ contextual menu). In general, the interactivity of the interface was highly criticized. It was unstable (crashed frequently) and at points it was extremely slow. Participants found the software very attractive, for they reported that they could find the images they needed to complete the assignment. However, usability problems were the cause of frustration and loss of motivation to continue using it. Finally, this software is intended to be used by designers. All of them made comments on the general design, layout and selection of color of the interface. In the next section, an interface that pretends to overcome these difficulties is presented and tested. 5.6 Fifth Study: Improving and Testing the QBE System This section reports on the design, development and testing of a new, improved interface to the QBE system. The objectives are to determine whether the improvements are in the right direction. Besides the added interactivity, the enhancement of the stability and the performance and the expansion of the image collection, it is of particular interest to evaluate if the new access to the database, by means of a preview of the collection’s content, is a viable way to Copyright @ 2004. Delft University Press. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. 118 Information Processing in Design solve the zero page problem. The research setting and the procedure were identical to the ones in the previous study. Only the participants, the interface and the design assignment were different. 5.6.1 The Improved Interface After the tests of the PHP and the Java interfaces (only the tests with the java were reported in the previous section) it was evident that in order to make the system work, big improvements in the design of the interface were required. These improvements needed to be done, not only on the functionality of the interface, making easier the interaction with the system, but also on the speed and stability of the system and the content of the image collection. Being a product targeted for designers, the appearance was a very important factor to consider. To improve the level of interactivity with the system, it was decided to use a different technology. Though Java written applications can reach high levels of interactivity, achieving functions such as drag and drop and copy and paste, standard in most modern applications, is very difficult. The technology chosen to provide the required flexibility was flash. Using Macromedia Flash MX, a totally new front end for the search engine was developed. The search occurs via an interactive process in which the designer gives to the system examples and counterexamples. In the example of Figure 22, the designer gave the system two chairs as positive examples and two other cubic looking products as counterexamples. The results, based exclusively on appearance, are not necessarily chairs, but do share characteristics that could be interpreted by the designer as he pleases, for instance, as organic, or as friendly or as modern, etc. The actual interpretation of the images is done during the use of the system, not before, for there are no human– generated descriptions attached to the images. In Figure 23, another example is shown. In this example, the designer gave the system two images of Macintosh products as seeds and two other non- Macintosh products as counter–examples. The results are for the most part other Macintosh products. The question is, are those products recognized by the system as Macintosh? The answer is no. The system is not aware of the content, nor are there any textual descriptions indicating this. These results are obtained based exclusively on the geometrical features these Macintosh products share. These common characteristics are probably what make a Macintosh look Macintosh. Note that in this example, not all the displayed products are Macintosh. Other products with the same appearance are also retrieved. The interface is divided into five areas. In the first area the designer can browse the collection. This feature was added after the designers in the previous experiment said that allowing browsing, along with searching would be a great improvement. The difficulty is that designing a structure, selecting the categories, etc. for all of the images in the collection is as difficult as describing the Copyright @ 2004. Delft University Press. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. Supporting the Creative Designer 119 Figure 22 Screenshot of a Query by Example system In area 2, the user drags the images to be used as examples (should look like this) and area 3 is used for counter examples (should not look like this). The results are ordered by similarity. Area 1 is used to allow the user to browse through a set of examples of products that will serve as seeds for the query. Pressing the search button with an empty query returns a random set of images. Figure 23 Screenshot of a query where the intention was to get examples of products that look Macintosh. Copyright @ 2004. Delft University Press. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. 120 Information Processing in Design images themselves, which is what this system pretends to avoid. In this study, one of the objectives was to learn how to organize a part of the collection in a structure that allows a fast preview of the content of the collection and that provides the first seeds for a search. The version of the browser area used in this study generated an automatic tree like structure with random images taken from the database, and presented them using the same names of the categories used to store the images in the Database. Some times, these names were not self-explanatory, as the images were stored using code words to represent their source. For instance, PIM, VMuseum, IO_Delft, etc. A PHP script would take 10 random images from 10 random categories and present them as an overview of the content of the collection. The second area is where the user drags and drops the images that contain the characteristics sought (positive feed back) and the third area is where images with undesired characteristics are dragged and dropped. Once the query is composed, pressing search (“zoek”, in the figures), delivers the results. There is a fourth area where the user can compose a collage. There, images can be put in any order, can be tagged, described and saved. The fifth area, that corresponds to the lower part of the screen is where the results of the search are presented. The ideas from which this interface was designed were not only based on the results of the tests of the PHP and Java interfaces, but also on the research discussed in the previous sections. For instance, it was proposed that the meaning attributed to an image emerges in an interactive process of searching and giving feed back. It was also proposed that the meaning of an image is differential. That is, meaning becomes more evident by comparing it with other images that share common characteristics. This was reflected in the design of the interface by putting the search areas next to each other (areas 2 and 3 in Figure 22). In the example shown, the intention of the user is to find images that look like the ones in area 2. Putting the area where images that will receive negative feed back next to the images with the desires characteristics emphasizes the differences. In this case, the organic character is emphasized as opposed to the geometric, cube-like appearance of the images used as counterexamples. The query is then based on the distance between the positive and the negative images. In the same order of ideas, the results are better evaluated when both the query (positive and negative images) and the results of the query are visible at the same time. In the SnakeCharmer interface, the results, the query and the user’s collected images were presented in different tabs (see Figure 21). The collection of images was significantly improved. More than 40,000 images were collected. Only images depicting products were used in the tests (about 6,500). Due to some difficulties caused by the background of the images, those images with prominent backgrounds were removed. The final collection used in the following two tests had about 4,000 background-less images. Copyright @ 2004. Delft University Press. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. Supporting the Creative Designer 121 5.6.2 Participants The participants in this study were 12 senior students from the faculty of Industrial Design Engineering (IDE) at Delft University of Technology (5 female and 7 male ) that participated voluntarily from a group of 45 students that were contacted by e-mail. The selected participants were chosen based on their performance on the course Design Project 4. They were invited to our laboratory, one at a time to work on a small design assignment and to hold an interview. 5.6.3 The Design Assignment In this study, as in the previous one, the assignment consisted of the design of a product. For this design, the participants had to compose a collague. This time, the collage requested was more focused. The assignment was worded as follows: “An American company that develops office articles wishes to create a new line of products for bars and restaurants. It is their wish that the line represents the rock and roll spirit of the 50’s and the sobriety and simplicity of the Ritveld chairs.” The procedure and the data collection followed the same protocol described in the previous study. The training assignment was the same: collect five images that are some how related to each other and explain what the intended relation was. 5.6.4 Results During the execution of the assignment, the participants were asked to think aloud and to comment on their actions. The whole process was video taped and the protocols transcribed. Since the video camera was focused on the screen, it was possible to track the users actions, use of the mouse, selection of images, etc. For each user, a log was created, which recorded the observed behavior, the user utterances and a time stamp. This author, together with two other researchers, analyzed the tapes, focusing not only on what the users reported but also on the way they actually used the program. The results of the usability test were grouped in two categories of issues. The first one deals with problems related to the use of the basic functions of the software and with the (mis)understanding of what the software does. The second group of issues deals with typical problems with the interface (see table 20) In the first group of issues, the most common problem was the use of the search areas (areas 2 and 3 in Figure 22). A common problem (6 participants) was that the participants used the positive or negative feedback areas as collection area. As they got relevant results, instead of putting them in the collection area (area 4), they placed them in the feedback areas (areas 2 and 3). As a result, the queries became too complex, the search time became too long and the results were not adequate. This led to confusion and frustration. “I do not understand the program” (participant 10). “The results take too long, I am going to stop the query now…” (participant 7). “The anti-window, how does it work?” (participant 8). Copyright @ 2004. Delft University Press. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. 122 Information Processing in Design Main Category Sub-category Usability issue n Basic Functions Positive and negative feedback areas Too many images in the feedback areas 6 Negative feedback area unclear 4 Starts query with image in negative area 3 Does not give negative feed-back 3 Performance Search takes too long 3 (speed) Browsing takes too long 1 Performance Results are not always relevant (quality of the results) Can’t find what I’m looking for 23 Intelligibility Do not know what criteria the program uses 3 do not ‘understand’ the program 2 Interface problems Browsing area Browsing structure too complex 5 Dynamic structure (can’t find things back) 2 Does not work like explorer in windows 1 Does not open and close when clicking the folder 4 Feed back areas Labels ‘similar’ and ‘dissimilar’ not clear 2 Implement ctrl-c and ctrl-v 4 Delete this item not clear 2 Delete all items not clear 4 Can’t scroll down 2 Collage Area Can’t see zoom function 5 Flags too big 2 Flag OK with enter key 1 General Appearance Zoom function indispensable 4 Wrong color (dam green) 1 Collection Size of the collection Collection must be bigger 2 Type of objects Collection too limited 4 Iin collection Only trendy objects 2 Table 20 Categories of usability problems of the improved interface, examples of reported problems and their frequency Copyright @ 2004. Delft University Press. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. Supporting the Creative Designer 123 Another common problem (3 participants) was the use of the negative feedback area exclusively to formulate a query. Users put images only in the negative feedback area. This area is meant to instruct the system, after having performed a first query, which of the results are not relevant, in order to refine the search. Starting a query with only images in the negative feedback area is equivalent to asking a librarian “give me all the books that are not written by William Shakespeare”. This also leads to inadequate results. These difficulties were in some cases so frustrating that some of the participants decided to browse instead (3 participants). Being unable to find what they were looking for, the browsing method provided them a “quantity over quality” approach. They were able to eye scan a larger number of images using them opportunistically. “I am going to browse the collection instead, that way I can find what I want faster ” (participant 5). The overview of the content provided by the automatically generated structure was not without difficulties. The names of the categories are difficult to understand and to remember and do not relate to the content of each category in a meaningful way. “What are those @#%!&*$* names in the folders, I do not understand what they mean. This folder is called IO-new but I only see old-hat products and stuff from the fifties.” (participant 8). Since every time the user resumes browsing the system provides a different overview, it is difficult going back and finding an image that the he might have thought was useful. “I found an I-Mac, but when I go back to the folder where I thought it was, I cannot find it again” (participant 11). In relation to the second group, the most common issues were: • Four participants did not use the browser function. After asking them for the reasons, they argued that they were satisfied with the results of the search function (3 participants) and that they did not notice it (1 participant). “… I found the images I wanted, I did not notice the browsing because I did not need it” (participant 7) • The icons ‘remove this image’ and ‘remove all images’ (the little trash bins under the feedback and collection areas) were never used by 9 of the participants, and the 3 others did not notice that it was possible to remove only one image from these areas (remove this image) without clearing the entire query (pressing ‘remove all images’). • Users did not notice, until instructed, that the collection area can be used to compose collages directly, and that there is a ‘full screen function’. “I think it should be more clear how to use the collage area” (participant 11 referring to the personal collection area). • Many complaints about the lack of ctrl-c and ctrl-v functions (copy and paste). The last group of problems was related to the collection itself. Though there were 4,000 images, some participants felt that the collection should have been bigger. Most of the objects collected were taken from design magazines, internet shops and the websites of manufacturers. As a result, a large number of them were modern, new products. Contrasting with these products were the images of the design museum. Most of the images of that collection (about 1,000) are Copyright @ 2004. Delft University Press. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. 124 Information Processing in Design classic design products from the fifties’ and sixties’. Two of the designers asked for more ordinary products as well. 5.6.5 Sufficient Number of Participants? The total number of participants for this test was 12. For the analysis one participant was left out, because his tape was damaged. Whether 11 are sufficient participants for discovering all the usability problems that would be significant to the development of the software might be questioned. To answer this question, we used an algorithm method proposed by Kanis and Ariz (2000) to predict the maximum total of observations that could be made (of usability problems, e.g.) if an infinite number of participants was taken. with total number of distinctive usability problems estimated to be found after an unlimited ( ) number of participants total number of usability problems observed total number of distinctive usability problems found after the nth participant average of observed usability problems per participant and average of the n combinations of the findings over n-1 participants. This is calculated as follows: The ratio is an indication of the proportion of the estimated number of usability problems that have already been found after n participants. This proportion is illustrated in table 21. The estimation of , as indicated by Kanis and Ariz, is based on a rising proportion of shared observations between participants in an ongoing trial. That is to say, as new participants are observed, the overlap between the number of different observations raises approaching asymptotically when . A characteristic of this algorithm is that all the observations are independent. For instance, the problem understanding the function of the feed back areas is not related to, let’s say, the performance of the software, or the complexity Copyright @ 2004. Delft University Press. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. Supporting the Creative Designer 125 of the browsing structure. Another characteristic of the algorithm is that all the issues are considered to be equally significant. As shown in table 21, all observed usability problems were already observed after 9 participants. With this dataset, it is predicted that with an infinite number of participants 28.1 problems would be observed. With 11 participants 96% of the predicted usability issues were observed. However, as it is discussed in Kanis and Ariz, this estimation of tends to be biased both for practical and for statistical reasons, therefore the value of should be seen more as a informed indication rather than as an absolute prediction. 5.6.6 Discussion of the Results Many of the usability problems mentioned above are relatively easy to solve. They correspond to a category of problems that deal either with the design of the interface or with the algorithms used to calculate the collection’s overview. Nonetheless, there is a problem that is perhaps the main usability problem, and the one that is most difficult to solve. This problem is the discrepancy between the user’s expectations and the results of the system. For the users, it is not always clear how the software decides which image is similar to which. Some successes (finding all lamps that look alike, or finding chairs that look alike) generate very high expectations in the users. The system could not always meet these expectations. Humans can group images into categories very easily, because there is an intention underlying the classification. For instance, if the user is looking for hair dryers and gets hand drills, the results might be dismissed as irrelevant. However, if the user is looking for products that are syntactically similar to a hair dryer (two elements arranged in an L shape) the results might be considered highly relevant. The CBIRS uses a low representation of the images based on features such as color, texture, geometry and spatial distribution. When querying the CBIRS, it uses all the criteria and gives the same relative importance to each one. That means that two products that are similar in color and texture might appear similar to the system even though they are geometrically very distant and therefore considered different by a human. A big improvement would be allowing the Participants 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 7 9 18 20 21 23 25 26 27 27 27 11.67 45.50 31.27 28.30 28.00 28.51 29.64 29.50 28.54 28.10 0.77 0.34 0.64 0.74 0.82 0.88 0.88 0.92 0.95 0.96 Table 21 Estimates of and after each participant Copyright @ 2004. Delft University Press. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. 126 Information Processing in Design user to select what criteria to search from. For instance, concentrating only on spatial distribution and color, ignoring all the other criteria. Judging the participants’ way of using the system, it can be said that the summary of the content of the database provided a useful means to find the seeds to be used in the queries faster. Browsing, as a method to explore a collection is very attractive, because the user can interact a lot with the system without having to ask too much, but the problem of classifying information into a few categories to browse through is very difficult. Muller presented a review of methods to automatically summarize the content of a collection (Müller, W.T.E., 2001). One of these methods, the automatic generation of random sub-sets, was the one used in this version of the interface. However, it is not enough allowing the user to browse through an automatically generated structure: design precedents need to be grouped in semantically meaningful clusters, which are not necessarily based only on appearance Browsing through categories could be easier if those categories were meaningful to the user. That is, if the names of the categories match the criteria by which users search images. The intention of the study presented in section 5.5 was to learn about the designers vocabulary so we could use the same words to structure the browsing area. A structure that is closer to their way of talking about products, it is expected, would make the process of browsing more natural. However, as discussed in the previous study, the participants used a very limited vocabulary that would be difficult to implement as a browsing structure. Nonetheless, the groups used to categorize the utterances in the previous study (see table 17) look very similar to Muller’s (2001) typology of design knowledge. This indicates that there could be contact points between his proposition on how to categorize images (Muller and Pasman, 1996) and the results of our studies. Their approach, organizing a large collection of precedents into categories, proved to be very difficult, resources intensive and dependant on expert knowledge. What is more, the names of the categories that follow Muller’s topology are not always understood by all designers. Concepts such as ‘unsegmented’, ‘homomorphic’ or ‘irregularly disposed’ (Muller, 2001. p.174) sound very distant from what the designers say about products. There is little relation between the (poor) vocabulary used by designers to describe products and the (specialized) vocabulary used by Muller in his typology. However, if the objective of the browsing structure is to give the users an overview of the content of the collection, and at the same time help them find the first seed, it is not necessary to organize the entire collection using this structure. Using only some of the categories proposed by Muller, illustrating the concept with a few examples, can be a suitable solution. In this way, it would not be necessary to organize and index the entire collection according to a typological structure. Users can e.g. browse to the category ‘rectangular’, find there examples of rectangular products, and then use one or more of them to find all the other rectangular products in the collection. This approach will be implemented, tested and discussed in the study presented in the next section. Copyright @ 2004. Delft University Press. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. Supporting the Creative Designer 127 5.7 Sixth Study: What Designers are Looking for This study was set with two objectives in mind. The first one was to test the improvements in providing a better version of the browsing tree to give access to images that can potentially be used as seeds for the query. The second one was to test again what criteria designers use in their assessments of images. This was already tested in the first study; however, the multiple usability problems of the interface were the cause of frustration and lack of motivation to continue with the experiment, acting as a source of noise for the results. The new interface should prevent this. To test if browsing a summary of the database would provide a useful means to find this first seed, 10% the content of the collection (400 images) was organized in a structure that is largely inspired by Muller’s typology of design knowledge (Muller, 2001). Although the results of the study presented in section 5.5 showed that the actual vocabulary of the designers cannot be directly used to generate a structure for the browser, it showed that there are similarities with Muller’s theory (this of course, can be due to the fact that they were all educated using Muller’s theory). Table 22 presents the categories used. In each category, five images that were considered representative of the concept were placed. The browsing area was designed in a Explorer-like way, in directories and subdirectories. This is a familiar interface for browsing for many users. The maximum level of nesting was kept to three. The reasons for choosing this maximum depth are discussed in chapter 3. The criteria used in the assessment of the images are explored by interviews where participants are asked about their choices. These interviews were semistructured and the entire process (use of the system and interviews) was video taped and the protocols were transcribed. 5.7.1 Participants The participants in this study were 10 senior students from the faculty of Industrial Design Engineering (IDE) at Delft University of Technology (7 female 70%, 3 male 30%) that participated voluntarily from a group of students who were contacted by e-mail. They were invited to our laboratory, one at a time, to work on a small design assignment and to hold an interview. 5.7.2 Procedure The procedure followed was identical to the one followed in the first study. The same design assignment and the same research protocol were used. (See appendix 2.1). The only change was that the interviews were more detailed. In this case, the participants were asked questions about three images selected randomly from the ones they collected in the collection area. In some cases, it was necessary to show them the video tapes so they could see themselves and reflect on their actions. All the protocols were fully transcribed. The data collection and the interviews were conducted by a research student. The analysis Copyright @ 2004. Delft University Press. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. 128 Information Processing in Design of the data was done by this author and another researcher of this faculty. Two pilots were run, and since it was not necessary to adjust the research setting, the data from these were used in the results. 5.7.3 Results From Function to Context to Form: The Construction of the Product Image The protocols provided an insight into the rationale behind the designers’ choices of visual information, and showed the path followed in selecting the images for the collage. All the participants started by browsing through the database and of these, six started looking for telephones. They asked questions such as “what type of mobile phone would he have” (participant 5); “I am going to start collecting telephones” (participant 4); “I’ll start browsing by function, […] telephones for domestic use”. Participant 7 did it differently, “I am going to start with something different, with sports”. The other participant that did it different was number 6, whom started browsing by form, but very soon after switched to function and started looking for telephones. After having explored the images on telephones, a big change in strategy can be seen. In all cases, the designers talked about the users, describing them in terms of the products they would or would not have. For instance, participant one selected a “sofa that is a little bit straight, and this lamp, because I do not think that this gentleman would have a pink lamp” Participant 5 added an Audi saying “Yep, they drive an Audi… or a Scooter? No, definitively an Audi” and Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Function means of transport bikes, car’s, moped’s, scooter’s etc. personal devices Electric toothbrush, personal audio players, camera’s, Glasses, Hair Dryers etc. household equipment Refrigerators, Vacuum Cleaners, citrus Juicers, Coffee makers, Irons etc. living room chairs, couches, lamps, tables, televisions etc. office computers, desks, printers, etc. tools power drills, saws etc. Form spatial relation high, narrow, slim, sturdy, wide,. orientation central, linear, orthogonal, peripheral, radial. plasticity geometric, spatial filling, spatial structuring, multiform, organic. space distribution asymmetrical, irregular, regular, symmetrical. Semantic Features masculine, impulsive, serious, friendly, feminine, etc. Table 22 Categories in which the database was summarized (adapted from Muller, 2001) Copyright @ 2004. Delft University Press. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. Supporting the Creative Designer 129 immediately after added a Scooter in the negative feedback area. Participant 2 mentioned that she would start looking at “status symbols”. In general, the most added products were Rolex, B&O, and ‘high-tech’ products. Others such as the Barcelona Chair, the Porsche designed kitchen appliances and several Macintosh products were also used to describe what the user would possess and therefore considered for the composition of the collage. “He drinks espresso” said participant 5 before adding a espresso machine. Some other products that were put in the negative feedback area had the intention of eliminating what the designers considered users in the given target group would not have. For instance, user 1 tried a search on a mobile phone. One of the results was a calculator (see fig.). She removed the calculator and added later instead a PDA mentioning that “a PDA would represent better the user in this target group”. Participant 6 said that “he would not have an agenda but a palmtop”. Participants 1 and 5 used an Iron as negative feedback because such a user “would not have an iron”; “I do not think he would have this lady shaver” (participant 6). Products were used not only to describe the user in the target group, but also to describe the context in which the telephone to be designed would be used. Six of the nine participants mentioned explicitly that they selected particular pieces of furniture because they imagined the living room of the potential user having these products. Plasma televisions, B&O stereos and halogen lamps were common in the collages: “B&O products come very close to the atmosphere” (participant 5). Scatter of Categories of Utterances and Strategies Used 0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% Time (normalized) pp1 pp2 pp3 pp4 pp5 pp6 pp7 pp8 pp9 Form Context Function Search Browse Figure 24 The utterances of the participants refer to function, context or form. The scatter shows what the user consid-ered at a certain time. Time has been normalized, as there are slight differences in the total time spent by all participants. Copyright @ 2004. Delft University Press. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. 130 Information Processing in Design After considering users and contexts, the tendency of the users is to describe the form the product would have. This is done mostly with the help of new images found in the database and almost always using keywords extracted from the text of the design brief. Examples of what participants said are “I am looking for masculine forms with high tech details. Masculine is squared”(participant 4); “I am looking for squared things, I find that masculine” (participant 2); “I can find very little good, hard forms, rectangular and sharp, just cubic like shapes” (participant 9). Participant 5 said “I throw asymmetric out because I find it too female and not straight enough”. “It has to be streamlined, but not too much that it becomes organic, I do not find that high-tech” (participant 6). Other aspects than form were also used to describe the character they were looking for. For instance, materials, textures and colors. Participant 8 mentioned “I have a high tech aluminum in my head” and participant 4 mentioned “black and metallic products are very common amongst men in west Europe”. This path of moving from function to context to from is not linear or sequential, as shown in Figure 24. This figure is a scatter of the designer’s behavior. To construct this figure, the total time spent by the designers was normalized, as there are small differences in the time participants used the database. Every 30 seconds we placed a dot in one of the three categories depending on the last utterance of every designer for that timeslot. Every 60 seconds a dot was placed on search/browse depending on the last action. The scatter reveals interesting aspects of the designers tendency to focus first, during roughly 20% of the time, on function. This browsing on function becomes less prevalent as other aspects are explored. Between 20% and 80% in the timeline, the focus is on aspects of the user or aspects of the context of use. Interestingly, as the designer progresses in this activity, more an more remarks related to form are made.. The last 15% of the time is mostly spent discussing aspects of the form. Strategies Followed: Searching vs. Browsing At a first glance, the distinction between searching and browsing does not follow a particular pattern. Designers started browsing and moved to searching at various points but continued to come back to the browsing area. However, when correlating the strategy to the categories they were looking for, the relation becomes clearer. In the first minutes, the dominant activity is browsing. This occurs because of the zero page problem that has already been described in the previous sections. Not having a first seed with which to start the search, browsing is the only alternative. The dominant category in these first minutes is function. Very soon after browsing, users find themselves navigating through household and office products, using those as seeds for searching. Later in the process, as the focus shifted from function to context, the search engine did not produce satisfactory results. The designers kept coming back to the browsing area as they got frustrated by the inability of the system to recognize their intentions. For instance, one designer posed a query with a B&O stereo, a Rolex and an Audi, expecting to get more of these “status symbols” (participant 2). As it has been discussed Copyright @ 2004. Delft University Press. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. Supporting the Creative Designer 131 before, only queries with products that share geometrical features can be retrieved, as the semantics of the images cannot be automatically inferred. Towards the end, when form was more important that other aspects, users started to use the search capabilities again. However, every time it did not deliver the expected results, they went back to browsing, but with less time spent, as results based on form-based queries are more accurate. However, if searching did not deliver the expected results, they went back to browsing. This behavior can be the result of conditioning by experience: all the computer based collections used previously by the participants (such as stock photo collections) allowed only browsing or keyword searching. Use of Language: How are the Products Described? When a list of keywords used by the participants during the study is made, it is interesting to notice that most of them come directly from the design brief. “I am looking for something masculine, high-tech, etc.”. In only three occasions were the relation between the geometrical features of products and the semantic features sought made explicit. Those were masculine and squared (participants 2, 4 and 9); organic/asymmetric and feminine (participants 5, 6 and 9) and materials/textures and high-tech (participant 4, 5 and 8). Although in all the other occasions the participants were quite able to select products that would represent their target group, they were still unable to identify what it was what gave those products the character they recognized in them. The participants produced a total of 524 remarks containing only 52 adjectives, out of which only 10 referred to geometrical features such as round, asymmetric, linear, etc. Most of the remarks used adjectives such as cool, hip, expensive, masculine, boring, etc. Is there a relation between the criteria used by the designers and the manner the information was structured in the browsing area? In an attempt to solve the zero page problem, the browsing area was structured using a set of categories inspired by Muller’s organization of design knowledge (seet 22). A zoom into the browsing behavior reveals that the categories’ form and semantic features were barely used. Most of the browsing was done in the sub-categories under function. When asked about this behavior during the interviews, the designers said that they did not understand the categories under form (6 times) and that they did not notice the category ‘semantic features’ (2 times). Others simply saw no need to go to the ‘form’ or ‘semantic features’ categories (2 times). When some participants browsed through the ‘form’ sub-categories, they said that they did not understand the technical terms (2 times); that the terms become clearer by seeing the examples shown (6 times) and that they could use some of the products as a query seed (2 times). In both these 2 occasions it was associated with remarks describing ‘masculine’ products related to ‘squared’ products. In general, participants were less interested in looking for products that would have the same geometrical features than in products that, combined, could be used to represent a particular context of use, or what would be typical for a particular target group. Copyright @ 2004. Delft University Press. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. 132 Information Processing in Design Although there is a relation between the criteria used to select images and the browsing structure, their inability to recognize the geometrical features that give character to a product makes difficult for them to understand the browsing structure, to understand the results and to pose queries that are meaningful to the system. 5.8 General Discussion One of the aspects that was considered was the design vocabulary used by the participants to express what they were looking for. This was surprisingly limited. Whether this is a consequence of a real lack of design vocabulary or a difficulty in verbalizing their ideas was not investigated. It was clear, however, that should the system have used keywords for a search, the entire process would have been less rich in results. Searching by keywords requires having a clear idea of what is being sought and of how the information in the database was represented and indexed. Due to the ill-defined character of the design tasks, and the vagueness of the initial ideas, this clarity is rare at this point in the design process. Providing a non-linguistic means of searching was welcomed by the designers. The ability of the system to look for images that look alike allowed the designers to study examples they would not have considered otherwise. One of the participants expressed it as “when you are looking for telephones, the chances of finding, say, a PDA that inspires you, are very small”. The system allows designers to refine their idea by letting them explore a wide variety of products that, though different in function, share other characteristics. The fact that a search for chairs, as in Figure 22, produced also other images that are not chairs, is more to the advantage of the user than a flaw in the system. This type of result stimulates other creative processes, like lateral thinking. In most computer systems, as in for example mathematical software, the quality of the output generated by the computer, measured in terms of predictability of the results, is very important. That is, the results should be constant, consequent, predictable and always the same for the same operation. Contrastingly, in the case of systems to support creative processes, the way the user’s thinking is influenced is far more important than the actual output. It is for this reason that the results of a query in our system do not have to be perfect (and cannot be, because perfect image recognition is still impossible) as long as the response is consequent with the user’s intentions. It is this consequence what defines the relevance of the results. The designer’s willingness to use a computer system (for finding design precedents or other type of information) is largely determined by the perceived relevance of the results it produces. Relevance is not a property of the information itself, but an attribute endowed by the user in a certain situation. Relevance is therefore a product of the interaction between the designer and the system. An image, for instance, will be considered relevant if it closely fits the designer’s expectations, that is, if the information it contains is what the designer expected it would contain. Copyright @ 2004. Delft University Press. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. Supporting the Creative Designer 133 Visual information is useful if it is delivered in such a way that the designers understand the rationale behind the choices made by the software. This rationale was not always understood by the designers. For instance, a user wanted to search household products by using a phone and a sofa. This is not an irrational way of thinking, but since the system uses only common geometrical features in these images, the results were not what the user expected. The designers also wanted to decide what criteria to search for. For instance, they would have liked to search e.g., based only on geometry (ignoring color, texture, etc.). They also wanted to be able to search by product type. In the beginning, when the image of what to look for is still vague, when the designer does not know what to search for, searching by similarity was very useful. However, when the designer does know what he wants, this approach is difficult to use. Giving examples is a very coarse way of posing a query. The reason is that the user might not be interested in all the characteristics of the given example, but only on a few ones, like the geometry, or the texture, or only a part of the image (the buttons used in that radio, the frame of that bicycle or the screen of that lamp), therefore the importance of allowing the user to select the criteria applied during the search. This imperfect method is nonetheless, very appropriate when the user is still at the stage in which an idea of what is needed is not yet completely formed. However, as the user progresses in the image forming process, the need for specific examples appears. At this point, the precision of a text-based search was often requested. Responding to the first question proposed in this chapter, many different approaches were reviewed. Text-based searching based on pre-determined descriptions, querying by icons, sketches or just browsing through pre-established structures were common strategies, all of which had significant shortcomings: the impracticality of needing an editor to describe every image or the impossibility of using these descriptions due to the contextual, differential and situational character of meaning attribution. This chapter proposed an approach that, based on image recognition techniques, provides a means for automatically indexing large image collections, and a way to search through them in a non-linguistic way. While our tests showed the potential of this approach, they also made evident other difficulties. When the search criteria is vague, the system provides an ideal way to help the designer formalize ideas; but when the designer knows clearly what he wants, searching using images is less appropriate. Eliminating the human mediated process of classifying, describing and indexing images allows the organization of vast amount of precedents. In our laboratory, we indexed over 40,000 images in about 12 hours (which is the time the computer needs to create an index based on the low-level representations of the images). However, during the tests with designers we used only a subset of 4,000 photographs of products. This chapter has shown that representing precedents using language, icons, sketches are all approaches with disadvantages. To be able automatically to index and retrieve images using a QBE approach, the images must be repredissertation.Copyright @ 2004. Delft University Press. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. 134 Information Processing in Design sented using low-level image representations. Whilst this approach delivers usable results, it also has, as has been shown throughout this chapter, difficulties and disadvantages. These observations make it questionable whether there is a right way to represent and index precedents in a meaningful way. Humans have great ability to recognize if two things are related to each other. For instance, if one takes a vacuum cleaner, an iron and a toaster, it is easy to say that they are all electric household appliances, and that ‘iron’ is more related to ‘toaster’ than to say, ‘scooter’. This was demonstrated by the user that expected to find household products by giving the system a sofa and a phone. Organizing precedents in a way that allows this ability to be exploited seems to be the next step. This idea has been implemented in a prototype that is currently being tested. Preliminary results show that this is a significant improvement over the system developed for this research. Copyright @ 2004. Delft University Press. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. 