SpreadableMediaHenry Jenkins, Sam Ford, Joshua Green Published by NYU Press Jenkins, Henry & Ford, Sam & Green, Joshua. Spreadable Media: Creating Value and Meaning in a Networked Culture. New York: NYU Press, 2013. Project MUSE., https://muse.jhu.edu/. For additional information about this book https://muse.jhu.edu/book/21244 Access provided at 18 Sep 2019 18:25 GMT from Universidad de Los Andes 44 While chapter 3 explored how the concept of “engagement” is helping redefine audience measurement, chapter 4 is focused on how the shifting relations between media producers and their audiences are transforming the concept of meaningful participation. Consider two quotes that represent a larger discourse proclaiming the end of media“consumption” as it’s historically been described: Every time a new consumer joins this media landscape, a new producerjoins as well because the same equipment—phones, computers—lets you consume and produce. It is as if when you bought a book, theythrew in the printing press for free. (Shirky 2005) The people formerly known as the audience wish to inform mediapeople of our existence, and of a shift in power that goes with theplatform shift you’ve all heard about. Think of passengers on yourship who got a boat of their own. The writing readers. The viewerswho picked up a camera. [. . .] Many media people want to cry out in the name of reason herself: If all would speak who shall be left to listen?Can you at least tell us that? (Rosen 2006) The “consumers,” the argument goes, are becoming producers. Not so fast, warn Jose Van Dijk and David Nieborg (2009). Their 153 essay “Wikinomics and Its Discontents” dissects and critiques recent Web 2.0 manifestos (including, full disclosure, Convergence Culture: Where Old and New Media Collide [Jenkins 2006b]) that describeWHAT CONSTITUTESMEANINGFUL PARTICIPATION?WHAT CONSTITUTESMEANINGFUL PARTICIPATION? fundamental shifts in the economic and cultural logics shaping the media landscape. Citing a 2007 Forrester survey of U.S. adults onlinewhich found that 52 percent of people online were “inactives” and only13 percent were “actual creators” of so-called user-generated content, Van Dijk and Nieborg conclude, “The active participation and creationof digital content seems to be much less relevant than the crowds theyattract. [. . .] Mass creativity, by and large, is consumptive behavior bya different name” (861). What, they ask, has changed—if anything—ina world where “the majority of users are in fact those who watch or download content contributed by others” and where this segment of “spectators and inactives” represents the most “appealing demographicto site owners and advertisers” (861)? They find the shift away from “audiences” or “consumers” toward “users” profoundly misleading,since the latter term merges passive (“merely clicking”) and active(“blogging and uploading videos”) modes of engagement, making it unclear exactly what “use” is. However, as we detailed in chapter 3, we think audiences do important work beyond what is being narrowly defined as “production”here—that some of these processes marked as “less active” involvesubstantial labor that potentially provides value according to bothcommercial and noncommerciallogic.Even though weareexcitedabout lowering the barriers of entry to cultural production, we shouldnot assume that audience activities involving greater media productionskills are necessarily more valuable and meaningful to other audiencemembers or to cultural producers than are acts of debate or collectiveinterpretation—or that media properties which drive more technical forms of audience creation and participation are somehow more engaging than content that generates discussion and sharing is. Aspeople push DIY media making as the be-all and end-all of participatory culture, they risk reducing other kinds of participation—the evaluation, appraisal, critique, and recirculation of material—to “consumptive behavior by a different name.” Unlike Rosen, we believe that there are still people who are primarilyjust “listening to” and “watching” media produced by others. However,like Yochai Benkler (2006), we argue that even those who are “just” reading, listening, or watching do so differently in a world where they154 What Constitutes Meaningful Participation? recognize their potential to contribute to broader conversations aboutthatcontent than in a world where they are locked out of meaningful participation. (More on this later.) Van Dijk and Nieborg may also underestimate some changes incultural production by focusing on data that only include adults. A 2007 survey by the Pew Center for the Internet & American Life (Lenhart et al.) found that 64 percent of U.S. teens online had produced media, with 39 percent circulating that content beyond friends and family. Over the past five years, Pew has seen dramatic increases in youth media production (more than 10 percent), suggesting a trend toward increasingly active participation.1 Van Dijk and Nieborg are correct, though, that this is not yet—andmay never be—a world where every reader is already a writer andevery audience already “the people formerly known as.” An individualwho “productively” responds to one media property, brand, or cause may be a “passive” listener to many others; activity and passivity are not permanent descriptions of any individual. And we respect Matt Hills’s warning that, at times, the concept of “cultural producer” has been “pushed to do too much work” in the hopes of “removing the taint of consumption and consumerism” (2002, 30). Throughout this book, then, we want neither to overstate the prevalence of many activeaudience behaviors nor to discount forms of engagement too oftenlabeled as “passive.” This clash between a view which sees networked communication as fundamentally altering the nature of audienceship (“the peopleformerly known as the audience”) and as changing nothing significant about existing structures (“consumptive behavior by a different name”) is one of a series of competing frames (lurking versus legitimateperipheral participation; resistance versus participation; audiences versus publics; participation versus collaboration, hearing versus listening;consumers versus co-creators) which are shaping our understanding of online participation during this transitional moment. These various binaries come from many different disciplines and perspectives, including marketing research, cultural studies, political science, education, anthropology, and digital studies, suggesting a persistent difficultyfor defining what constitutes meaningful participation across many What Constitutes Meaningful Participation? 155 different fields. Throughout this chapter, we will struggle betweenconflicting and perhaps contradictory pulls—between a corporateconception of participation (which includes within it a promise ofmaking companies more responsive to the needs and desires of their “consumers”) and a political conception of participation (which focuseson the desire for us all to exercise greater power over the decisionswhichimpactthequalityofoureverydaylivesascitizens). Wewillnot be able to resolve these tensions here—the uneasy relationshipbetween capitalism and expanded communication capacity remains a vexing one which theorists of all stripes are confronting throughtheir work. We are trying to resist any easy mapping of one onto the other, yet they have been deeply intertwined in our everyday ways of talking about the “digital revolution.” Both concepts of participation are at stake in the restructuring of the media ecology that has taken place over the past two decades. And both are worth keeping in focusas we examine what changes and what remains the same in a culture in which grassroots practices of circulation are exerting greater impacton the kinds of media content we encounter and the relationshipswhich exist within and between networked publics. Lurking versus Peripheral Participation As illustrated by Van Dijk and Nieborg’s critiques of Web 2.0, it has become commonplace for skeptics to assert that the most active contributors represent avery small percentageof the user base for anyWeb 2.0 platform. Most often, within the industry, this insight isrepresented via a pyramid of participation, which shows how thepopulation of users narrows as you reach activities that demand moretime, money, resources, skills, and passion. As an example, consider the way Bradley Horowitz described how Yahoo! modeled audience participation in its Yahoo! Groups service: 1% of the user population might start a group (or a thread within agroup). 10% of the user population might participate actively, and actually author content whether starting a thread or responding to a threadin-progress. 100% of the user population benefits from the activities of the above groups (lurkers). [. . .] We don’t need to convert 100%156 What Constitutes Meaningful Participation? of the audience into “active” participants to have a thriving productthat benefits tens of millions of users. In fact, there are many reasons why you wouldn’t want to do this. The hurdles that users cross as they transition from lurkers to synthesizers to creators are also filters that can eliminate noise from signal. (2006) Such models frequently depict media production as the highest formof audience participation, dismissing many people as “inactive” and seeing audience members as having fairly fixed positions so thatchanges between those positions are seen as significant. One widely spread representation of Horowitz’s pyramid went so far as to label the 90 percent who were not actively producing content as “lurkers,” suggesting they drew on the community without contributing back. There are multiple alternative models offering more nuanced waysto think about participation (see, for instance, Hayes 2007; Bartle2003), with the more sophisticated models mapping the ecology ofinteractions between different participants, rather than constructing the hierarchies implicit in the pyramid structure. While these models help us visualize a complex process, we alreadyknow that users don’t adhere permanently to any one of these roles and often behave in different ways within various communities. Gamedesigner Raph Koster notes, with reference to gaming, that “everyoneis a creator”: “The question is ‘of what.’ Everyone has a sphere where they feel comfortable exerting agency—maybe it’s their work, maybeit’s raising their children, maybe it’s collecting stamps. Outside of thatsphere, most people are creators only within carefully limited circumstances; most people cannot draw, but anyone can color inside lines, or trace” (2006; emphasis in original). Moreover, seeing participationas a model with increasing levels of more intense engagement masks the degree to which all participants work together in an economyoperating under some combination of market and nonmarket logic, with various audiences performing tasks that support one another.From this perspective, a “lurker” provides value to people sharingcommentary or producing multimedia content by expanding the audience and potentially motivating their work, while critics and curatorsgenerate value for those who are creating material and perhaps forWhat Constitutes Meaningful Participation? 157 one another. Critics provide ideas about which content to value, and curators provide critics with easy access to the texts being examined. Educators have long studied how members of communities of practice learn from and sustain each other’s participation. Their research suggests that people initially learn through “lurking” or observingfrom the margins, that certain basic activities may represent steppingstones toward greater engagement, and that key individuals help to motivate others’ advancement. Jean Lave and Etienne Wenger describethis process as “legitimate peripheral participation,” noting that newcomers will integrate much more quickly if they are able to observe and learn from more skilled participants (1991, 29). In an oft-citedexample, they describe how apprentices are often asked to sweep the shop, giving them accesstothe establishment’s ongoingoperationsand a chance to see others apply their advanced skills across a range of different transactions. Lave and Wenger note, “As a place in which one moves toward more-intensive participation, peripherality is an empowering position. As a place in which one is kept from participating more fully—often legitimately, from the broader perspective of society at large—it is a disempowering position” (36). This reframing forces us to pay more attention to the “scaffolding” that different communities provide for participation but also asks us to recognize that “lurkers” may choose to “lurk” for many different reasons. As Susan Bryant, Andrea Forte, and Amy Bruckman write inan account of how one learns to be a Wikipedian, “Through peripheralactivities, novices become acquainted with the tasks, vocabulary, andorganizing principles of the community. Gradually, as newcomersbecome oldtimers, their participation takes forms that are more and more central to the functioning of the community” (2005, 2). TheWikipedia community has a strong interest in expanding its ranksand recruiting new members, and they proceed at their work in waysthat make it easier for people to become more engaged.2 We contrast this strong scaffolding with the conditions of production that surround mass media, where an elite few have the skills,knowledge, and motivations required to make meaningful contributions and where most of us remain observers. The processes of more skilled participants are hidden from public view in order to protect 158 What Constitutes Meaningful Participation? the “magic” and “mystique” of professional media making. YochaiBenkler says digital tools “enable anyone, anywhere, to go through hisor her practical life, observing the social environment through new eyes—the eyes of someone who could actually interject a thought, a criticism, or a concern into the public debate. Individuals become lesspassive and thus more engaged observers of social spaces that could potentially become subjects for political conversation” (2006, 11). Webelieve “lurkers” experience the content of these conversations differently, even if they never actually contribute, because of their awarenessof their potential capacity to participate and their recognition of lowerbarriers to contribution (though we recognize, as we discuss later in this chapter, that participation is not an option equally available toall). And, if that’s the case, it points toward fundamental shifts in the audience’s position. Many cultures are becoming more participatory (in relative terms) than previous configurations of media power. A Brief History of Participatory Culture Current debates about participatory culture emerge from a muchlonger history of attempts to generate alternative platforms for grassroots communication. Consider the development of the AmateurPress Association in the middle of the nineteenth century, which saw young people hand set, type, and print their own publications about culture, politics, and daily life and mail them through elaborate circuitswhich resemble what are now labeled “social networks” (Petrik 1992). Consider how this same community was among the first adoptersof amateur radio in the early part of the twentieth century (Douglas 1989). Consider the efforts of alternative political communities, such as the African American community’s creation of its own press inreaction to mainstream news coverage on issues it cared about or its own movies in response to the 1915 release of The Birth of a Nation. Consider the emergence of amateur camera clubs in the nineteenth century or the growth of home movie production in the twentiethcentury (Zimmerman 1995). And consider how various minoritygroups have used the concept of “consumer activism” and tacticssuch as boycotts and buycotts to struggle for greater social and legal equality (Cohen 2003). Participatory culture, in other words, has aWhat Constitutes Meaningful Participation? 159 history—indeed, multiple histories—much larger than the life span of specific technologies or commercial platforms. As early as 1932, Bertolt Brecht imagined the transformation of radiofrom a technology supporting passive mass audiences to a medium of collective participation: Radio is one sided when it should be two. It is purely an apparatus for distribution, for mere sharing out. So here is a positive suggestion:change this apparatus over from distribution to communication. The radio would be the finest possible communication apparatus in publiclife [. . .] if it knew how to receive as well as transmit, how to let the listener speak as well as hear, how to bring him into a relationshipinstead of isolating him. ([1932] 1986, 53) In the U.S. radio context, Brecht’s vision came its closest to fruition in the first two decades of the twentieth century, when transmitters wereas apt to be in the hands of scout troops, church groups, and schools as they were the hands of department stores and other commercialinterests (Douglas 1989). “We the People” eventually lost the battlefor radio, with ham operators and “pirate” stations on the periphery of most people’s experiences with the medium. The public retainedsome aspects of Brecht’s model in the space carved out for communityradio among local AM stations and in some public radio endeavors. However, in an era of personalized mp3 players and “curated” satellite radio, the prominence of these public alternatives to mainstream commercial radio continues to diminish. Ham radio operators areviewed today as nostalgic for an outdated technology. Indeed, theonly notable remnant of Brecht’s call for two-way communication is the longstanding U.S. CB culture, built on the radio communication devicesmost commonly associated with truck drivers who communicate on the road with one another using pseudonyms or “handles,” the avatars of the open road.3 Brecht’s agenda was revisited by Hans Magnus Enzensberger, who, in 1970, similarly predicted the emergence of a much more participatory media culture, one in which the means of cultural production andcirculation will be “in the hands of the masses themselves” ([1970] 2000,160 What Constitutes Meaningful Participation? 69). From this starting point, Enzensberger seeks to understand why the public has persistently failed to embrace the participatory potentials of communication technologies. Change, he argues, would come about not by altering the technological infrastructure, since the publicwas not taking advantage of already existing opportunities, but rather through shifting the social and cultural practices around media and overcoming economic and political obstacles to fuller participation. ForEnzensberger, the solution was not simply putting production in the hands of isolated individuals but rather promoting new kinds of publicswhich might adopt “aggressive forms of publicity” which allowed for the meaningful sharing of media content and enabled “mobilization.” As Aaron Delwiche (2012, 16) notes, Enzensberger’s essay needs to beunderstood as part of a much larger conversation about the potentials ofparticipatory culture, new media technologies, and their relationshipsto democratic citizenship, a theme which runs through many of thekey documents of 1970s counterculture. For example, the Port Huron Statement—issued by Students for a Democratic Society several yearsprior, in 1962—coupled the demand that a citizen should have a say in those “social decisions determining the quality and directions of his life”with the call to “provide media” for citizens’ “common participation” in key deliberations (12). Delwiche points out that this counterculture discourse sought to distinguish between the potentials of technologiesand the way their previous uses had been shaped by the “technocratic” structures of dominant institutions (12). The hope was that, if the publiccould expand its access to new channels and processes of communication, they might use them as a tool through which to fight for a more democratic culture. Fred Turner (2008) has shown how these ideas, inturn, exerted a powerful influence over cybercultural developments inthe past few decades, highlighting the importance of mapping these earlier ruminations on cultural and political participation to the typesof developments this book documents. Today’s era of online communication demonstrates some decisive steps in the directions Brecht and Enzensberger advocated, expandingaccess to the means of cultural production (through ease-of-accessand-use tools) and to cultural circulation within and across diverse communities. Brecht’s conception of a world where listeners become What Constitutes Meaningful Participation? 161 “suppliers” of material for other listeners has been more fully realized in the digital era than radio ever achieved. Podcasting, for example, has returned the radio format—if not the technology—to a moreparticipatory medium, allowing many different groups to produceand circulate radiolike content.4 We should acknowledge that, for many of these writers just discussed, changing the structure of media ownership was central totheir analysis of what needed to take place before we could achieve a more participatory culture. But these authors also assumed thatgreater public access to tools for cultural production/circulation and to core information about how society works would simultaneously result from and create shifts in ownership structures. From that perspective, the current moment, when media concentration remainsalongside an expansion in the communicative capacities of everyday people, is paradoxical. To understand it, we may need to separateout different kinds of control over channels of communication. We might, for example, distinguish between the kinds of informationcontrol exerted by television networks (which tightly program all thecontent they distribute) and telecommunications companies (which determine who has access to bandwidth and how much priority isgiven to different uses of the system but holds little editorial oversight,or liability, for the content shared through their technologies). Theshift of the dominant means of communication from broadcast todigital may in the process loosen the grip of corporate control over many types of content, resulting in the active circulation of a greater diversity of perspectives. And yet, as these gains are made, struggles will only intensify over questions of access—particularly for net neutrality—making debates about corporate constraints on access tonetworks, and the uses of them, ever more crucial. Resistance versus Participation As suggested by the quotes from Shirky and Rosen at the beginning ofthis chapter, the gains made in expanding access to media platforms in a digital world are often painted as resistance to mainstream mediaindustries. For instance, industry voices, activists, and bloggers alike have frequently described the rising power of “the blogosphere” as162 What Constitutes Meaningful Participation? a challenge to journalists and commercial media, speaking of thediminishing authority of “big media” or the threat these free media sources pose to “legacy” institutions and practices. However, just as pundits have made the mistake of prioritizing audience activities on the basis of the level of technological skill involved, many likewiseincorrectly read grassroots media creation solely as a force of opposition or revolution against commercial media. Instead, somethingmore complex is occurring. This focus on “resistance” is consistent with language deployed by writers in the critical and cultural studies traditions since the 1980s.Today, academics are much more likely to talk about politics based on “participation,” reflecting a world where more media power rests inthe hands of citizens and audience members, even if the mass media holds a privileged voice in the flow of information. Syntax tells us all something key about these two models. We are resistant to something: that is, we are organized in opposition to a dominant power. We participate in something, that is, participation is organized in and throughsocial collectivities and connectivities. Corporate thinkers have alsoembraced a focus on participation, though they often want to see what we are participating in as some kind of “market” (potential or actual) for their goods and services. At the same time, others have used theconcept of “participation” to describe the civic behaviors of publics(concepts we’ll be covering in greater detail shortly). Both accountsstart from the assumption that participants feel a greater investment inthe institutions and practices of networked culture: they are less likely to try to overturn something which has given them greater stakes inthe outcome. Within advertising circles, the kinds of participation desired bycompanies are often discussed in terms of “brand communities.” Companies have been interested in the idea that the audiences they court form strong social bonds through common affinity for a brand, because,hopefully, these affective relations mean increased customer loyalty ata time when brand attachments are viewed as less stable than they havebeen in previous generations. Many marketers frame this concept as indicating corporate ownership over specific groups of people, readingthe “community” as largely reactive to the machinations of the brand.What Constitutes Meaningful Participation? 163 On the other hand, critics worry that such brand communities canbecome simple vehicles for promoting particular corporate messages,a vehicle solely for granting the company access to and credibility withmembers’ friends and families. In many cases, though, companies do not “create” brand communities. Rather, they “court” existing communities whose broad interestspredispose them toward the kinds of conversations the company seeksto facilitate. In a few cases, perhaps this idea of communities builtaround a company fits, broadly speaking—enthusiasts for Harley-Davidson, John Deere, and Apple have developed strong ties to these respective companies and their products. However, what usually happens within these “brand communities” is more complicated than that. First, to read these communities only as reactive enthusiasts fora company obscures potential conflicts these groups may have with the brand. Just as soap opera fans regularly declare ownership of“their show” and are vocal about the direction they think the producers should take, members of “brand communities” are often vocalabout customer service issues and critical about business decisions thecompany makes, feeling that their passionate support of a company’s products makes them an active stakeholder in the brand. Brand communities can thus play a policing role. They might enthusiasticallysupport a brand when it serves them, but they are also just as likely tocall for changes in corporate behavior or products when they think a company is acting in ways contrary to its customers’ interests. Second, brands may find themselves at the center of a social groupif and when they become a symbol for longstanding cultural affiliations. Motorcycle culture predated Harley’s “brand community.” Appledidn’t invent technology enthusiasts, and John Deere didn’t create an agrarian society. Rather, these brands generated deep affinity withsocially connected audiences inasmuch as they understood a culture that already existed and demonstrated that understanding throughthe marketing, design, and focus of their products. Given efforts by companies to forge such active and affective ties with their audiences, critics legitimately fear a blanket celebration of participation, especially if divorced from discussions of what people are participating in and who benefits from their participation. Mark 164 What Constitutes Meaningful Participation? Andrejevic, for example, argues that “the simple equation of participation with empowerment serves to reinforce the marketing strategies of corporate culture” (2008, 43), while political theorist Jodi Deantalks about “publicity without publics” (2002, 173), suggesting that theexpanded communication capacity enjoyed by new media participantsdoes not necessarily result in the kinds of thinking, debating communities envisioned by traditional understandings of the public sphere. While the notion of the “active reader” was associated with the “resistance” model—responding to earlier theories of media manipulationwhich assumed the passive absorption of ideological messages—the notion of audience “activity” and “sovereignty” has been absorbedinto Web 2.0 business models, requiring us to develop a more refinedvocabulary for thinking about the reality of power relations between companies and their audiences. (For a consideration of the strategies by which television producers actively solicit audience participation, see Columbia College Chicago television professor Sharon MarieRoss’s essay in our enhanced book.) We agree that companies have sometimes cynically exploited the public’s desire to “participate” in ways which serve commercial ends while ceding very little control to those who participate; companies rarely embracemoreparticipatorypracticesout ofpurelyaltruisticmotives. Rather, participation functions as a means of increasingaudience engagement, along the lines discussed in chapter 3. Butaudiences are not simply pawns for commercial interests or political elites; their shared identities and collective communication capacity allow them to speak out about their perceived interests. Many of the communities we are discussing here have historiesprior to the current digital communication and have asserted values, politics, identities, and practices that exist outside the digital platformsthrough which their activities are currently being conducted. Their collective interests involve shaping representations, asserting meanings and values, altering terms of service and conditions of labor, anddeploying the platforms toward larger movements for social change. They often are making calculations about the acceptable trade-offsbetween the value that companies extract from them and the benefitsthey gain through their use of corporate tools and platforms. MostWhat Constitutes Meaningful Participation? 165 of these groups would argue that they have gained communicationcapacity through online networks, even though they are frustratedby some of the more exploitative aspects of their engagement withthese companies. Often, they are publics and not simply audiences. Audiences versus Publics In Daniel Dayan’s usage, audiences are produced through acts of measurement and surveillance, usually unaware of how the traces theyleave can be calibrated by the media industries. Meanwhile, publicsoften actively direct attention onto messages they value: “A public notonly offers attention, it calls for attention” (Dayan 2005, 52). Publics, Sonia Livingstone tells us, are “held to be collectivities, more than thesum of their parts, while audiences by contrast are merely aggregates of individuals” (2005, 25). Dayan arrives at a very similar conclusion: “A public is not simply a spectator in plural, a sum of spectators, anaddition. It is a coherent entity whose nature is collective; an ensemblecharacterized by shared sociability, shared identity and some senseof that identity” (2005, 46). Deploying these terms, we might usefully distinguish—as others have—between “fans,” understood as individuals who have a passionate relationship to a particular media franchise, and “fandoms,” whosemembers consciously identify as part of a larger community to whichthey feel some degree of commitment and loyalty. Individual fans canbe thought of as parts of audiences, while fandoms start to demonstrate some traits of publics, bound together through their “sharedsociality” and “shared identity.” Fandoms seek to direct the attention of the media industries and, in the process, shape their decisions—a goal they pursue with varying degrees of success. Fandoms are one type of collectivity (in that they are acting ascommunities rather than as individuals) and connectivity (in thattheir power is amplified through their access to networked communications) whose presence is being felt in contemporary culture. Members of minority or subcultural communities, various kinds of activist and DIY groups, and different affinity groups are also linked through shared “sociality” and “identity” and are also seeking to “directattention” through their actions online. Much of the rest of this chapter166 What Constitutes Meaningful Participation? will be spent exploring different models that account for these developing forms of social experience and the kinds of collective powerthey exert over their communication environment. Thinking about audiences as publics may give us a new lens throughwhich to understand media fandom. Take, as an example, soap opera fans. While some viewers watch in isolation, the daily broadcast ofsoaps, with no off-season, facilitates rituals of sharing and debateamong family and friends during or after episodes. Such “gossip”(Brown 1990) has become a vibrant source of audience participation in a genre whose plots often focus on town “gossip.” Soap fans have longused new technologies to expand the scope of these processes—they have pushed from personal conversations to organized letter-writing campaigns, from the organization of fan clubs to the development of afan press, from online discussion boards to increasing use of blogs andpodcasts (Ford 2008a). The rise of digital platforms has only amplifiedand widened the scope of the activities of this already socially networked and participatory audience. Further, online forums and digitalproduction practices (such as uploading and remixing program content) have become popular among soap fans chiefly when they facilitatethe primary “work” of soap audiences: debating, critiquing, and soon (Webb 2011). Thus, one could argue, fan “production” remains asupplementary activity to what soap opera audiences have been doingsince the 1930s. (For more on the historical relations between soapfans, producers, and texts, see Miami University sociology professor C. Lee Harrington’s essay in our enhanced book.) In this environment, the soap text acts as a resource for audiences to build relationships, often engaging in critical debates that movebeyond situations on the show to people’s personal lives or else largermoral, political, religious, or civic issues—especially as soap operas have tackled “social issues.” In summer 2006, for instance,As theWorld Turnsfeatured a storyline about the coming out of teenagerLuke Snyder, focusing for the next several years on the reactions of Luke’s family and his attempts to manage life in the midwestern U.S. as a gay young adult. In the process, the story generated a variety of active debates among fans. Some gay male soap opera fans begandiscussing the coming-out storyline in gay chat forums, introducing What Constitutes Meaningful Participation? 167 a new community of viewers to As the World Turns (a “surplus audience”). Many used the show to mediate issues of the contemporary gay male identity in the U.S. and media representation of gay characters. Eventually, as Roger Newcomb (2011) discusses, many gay fans protested the story’s trajectory, particularly upset at a lack of physicalintimacy shown on-screen between Luke and his boyfriend because of what they perceived as network/producer concerns about potentialreactions from socially conservative audiences. The fan pressure led toan increase in the couple’s on-screen kissing, but the degree to which Luke was allowed to show affection and intimacy remained a focus until the show’s 2010 cancellation. Meanwhile, as longtime As the World Turns fans discussed the storyin online soap opera forums, conversations delved into viewers’ own perspectives and questions about homosexuality. On Michael Gill’s Media Domain, for instance, discussion shifted from Luke’s coming out to questions about whether sexual preference was genetically or environmentally determined. The question led to detailed and passionate personal responses. Posters shared stories of gay friends who had been molested as children and who had themselves wondered if the event helped shape their sexual identity; gay siblings who said theyknew they were gay from an early age or who were raised in otherwise heterosexual families; and an aunt who had experimented with homosexuality but ultimately settled into a long-term heterosexualrelationship. An openly gay fan shared her personal stories and views.Another board regular gathered and shared research from a variety ofmedical sources. While the discussion linked back to the text as the thread moved along, the storyline acted as a catalyst for a fan community with diverse social and political views to discuss issues of greatsocialimportancein (largely)civilways,in partbecausethese fanshad developed longstanding social relationships. Such discussionsillustrate how fan communities often take on several key aspects of publics, complicating any model that would paint these fans as passive audiences. Instead, a media text becomes material that drivesactive community discussion and debate at the intersection between popular culture and civic discourse—conversations that might lead to community activism or social change. 168 What Constitutes Meaningful Participation? Some activist groups seek to transform audiences into networkedpublics with which they might work in promoting their causes. One suchgroup is Brave New Films, a media production company established byprogressive documentary producer Robert Greenwall (Outfoxed: RupertMurdoch’s War on Journalism; Iraq for Sale; Wal-Mart: The High Cost of Low Price). Greenwall was an early adopter of Netflix as an alternative distributor of his content, thus using the commercial service as a lowcost way for his supporters to host house parties “in churches, schools, bowling allies, pizza parties, wherever there was a screen” (Greenwall 2010). Greenwall asked fans not simply to show his films but also todiscuss them—inserting the videos into ongoing conversations withincommunities and tapping social network sites/tools (especially Meetup. com) to rally audiences. In some cases, he linked multiple house partiestogether with live webcasts where the producer answered questions. A longtime television producer now running a nonprofit organization, Greenwall was more invested in getting the word out than incapturing revenue, though he uses the web to attract donations to helpsupport future productions. Speaking about Outfoxed, his critique of Fox News, Greenwall told the Boston Globe, “You have my permissionto give it away. This film is meant to be a tool, so you will take it and do with it what you will” (Gorman 2003). Greenwall found audienceswho share his cause, many of whom have an active distrust and disdain for commercial interests. Brave New Films constructs itself as a grassroots alternative to concentrated media. Increasingly, Greenwall’s team shares its videos through socialnetwork sites such as Facebook, encouraging “friends” to remix and circulate the content. During one of Brave New Films’ campaigns,the staff pushed their members to see if they could grow their Facebook community, looking to ensure the Facebook page for RethinkAfghanistan had more “fans” than the Department of Defense’s own community site. In the process, the company encouraged participantsto think of themselves as part of a networked public that could spreadthe word to its dispersed members. The group has also developedCuéntame, a Facebook page focused on Latin issues. Here, the Brave New Films team courts interest both through campaigns focused on explicitly political concerns (such as the Tea Party movement’s clashesWhat Constitutes Meaningful Participation? 169 with the NAACP or the protests surrounding Arizona’s immigration law) and more cultural interests (linking their progressive platform to discussions about pop stars or the World Cup). As Chuck Tyron (2009) notes, Brave New Films has long usedthe flexibility that digital distribution offers to continuously update its documentaries. Frustrated when a film focusing on Tom Delay’s ethics was rendered moot after the congressional leader was forced to resign, the team now rolls out feature-length documentaries inten-minute chunks via the web, capitalizing on their immediacy and topicality before incorporating them into longer works. Greenwall’s approach is consistent with what Jessica Clark (2009) has described as “public media 2.0.” Rejecting a paternalistic notion of “public service media” in favor of one where “public media” refers to media that mobilizes and facilitates publics, Clark argues that giving publics greater control over the circulation of media may deepen their investment: Rather than passively waiting for content to be delivered as in thebroadcast days, users are actively seeking out and comparing media onimportant issues, through search engines, recommendations, video ondemand, interactive program guides, news feeds, and niche sites. Thisis placing pressure on many makers to convert their content so that it’s not only accessible across an array of platforms and devices, butproperly formatted and tagged so that it is more likely to be discovered. In similar fashion to our spreadability model, Clark describes howsuch works offer resources to sustain public conversations, how audience members intensify their involvement through acts of curation and circulation, and how spreading the word may help prepare them to take action around the issues being discussed. Since the public canonly engage with content if they can find it among the plethora ofavailable options, it’s becoming increasingly important to use suchtexts as calls to action to gather such publics or else to develop material which can sustain or engage existing communities. While Greenwall’s group has welcomed people making videoresponses to, and remixes of, his films, “participation” is not just170 What Constitutes Meaningful Participation? limited to media creation. The acts of curation, conversation, andcirculation that help spread his progressive messages are understood as part of the political process. Undeniably a public, Greenwall’s supporters also demonstrate many behaviors and attitudes often associated with fan communities, including the desire to connect with the producer to gain early access to eagerly anticipated material. The complexities of these relationships might be suggested by the experience of fan activist group Racebending (Lopez 2011). The groupconsisted initially of the most passionate fans of the Nickelodeonanimated series Avatar: The Last Airbender, a program noted for its multinational and multiracial cast of characters. Though they come from imaginary ethnicities, the iconography of the program associatesthe fictional civilizations represented on the program with various EastAsian and Inuit cultures. This imagined multiculturalism was central to fans’ engagement. When fans heard that a proposed live-actionfeature film version would cast all white actors in the core roles—arumor later confirmed by casting calls seen as explicitly preferringCaucasian performers—they rallied against what they saw as a betrayalof the values they associated with the original property. They drew on avariety of the approaches fan communities have taken to put pressureon the film’s writer, director, and producer, M. Night Shamalyan—himself Indian American. Fans joined forces with other activist groupsdedicated to tackling Hollywood’s discrimination and challengingscreen representations of people of color, such as the theater group EastWest Players and the media advocacy group Media Action Network for Asian Americans. Lori Kido Lopez notes, “Some of the organization’s strongest and most effective tactics rely on the skills developed as members of the fan community: honing their arguments through community discussions, producing and editing multimedia creations,educating themselves about every facet of their issue, and relying on their trusted networks toprovide a database of information” (2011,432). This story looks different if interpreted in terms of audience resistance to the feature film or fans’ loyalty to the original animated series.Here, the franchise’s most ardent supporters are also its harshestcritics. While the producers of the original animated series did notpublicly challenge Paramount’s decisions, the fans felt strongly that What Constitutes Meaningful Participation? 171 their grassroots activities were protecting the integrity of the original vision, even as they called for a boycott. Racebending members spoke as fans and endorsed some commercially produced content;they generated their own videos, often through remixing commercialtexts; they sought to reverse unwelcome producer decisions; and theyorganized a boycott. Each of these behaviors implies a somewhat different relationship between this active audience and (some of) theproducers, as both aggressively pursued their own converging anddiverging interests. While the film producers have sought to dismiss the impact of the protest on their casting decisions, the fans were successful in reshaping the discursive context of the film’s release, forcing the producersto repeatedly respond to questions and challenges about their racialpolitics and ensuring that the erasure of ethnic difference was anythingbut invisible. When the same group of fans raised awareness of a similarwhitewashing of an Asian American character in a proposed film adaptation of theRunaways comics series, Disney and Marvel moved quicklyto reverse their casting call and reassure the group that the castingwould be race appropriate. The group’s investments as fans have given them a powerful position from which to challenge corporate interests. Participation versus Collaboration Drawing on popular representations of characters seeking to negotiate a space for themselves between occupying regimes and resistance movements, Derek Johnson has suggested a move away from metaphors of “warfare” or “resistance” and toward “collaboration,” a more morally complex relationship in which collaborators may “have takenup subject positions within an oppressive power structure, seeing it as the best means of serving their individual interests” and ultimatelyof creating new opportunities and tools “for others to challenge the rules of an occupied social order” (2010). Johnson’s notion of “collaboration” may be less comfortable tocorporate and public interests alike, because it calls attention to the messy, uncertain, and contradictory relationships between the two.Participating within a fan or brand community may or may not bea way of influencing the culture and may or may not be a way of172 What Constitutes Meaningful Participation? intensifying audience engagement with the property or brand. Collaborators are complicit with the dominant regimes of power, yetthey often also use their incorporation into that system to redirect its energies or reroute its resources. At the same time, companies often have to tolerate behaviors that may have once been seen as resistant or transgressive if they want to court the participation of these networked communities. Mary L. Gray, in her work on queer youth living in the rural U.S.,proposes the concept of “boundary publics”—“iterative, ephemeralexperiences of belonging that circulate across the outskirts and throughthe center(s) of a more recognized and validated public sphere” (2009, 92–93). Gray explains that such groups may form anywhere peopletemporarily occupy a space owned and operated by others to engage in serious conversations for their own purposes. Gray discusses, forexample, queer youths in a small Kentucky town who gathered in the aisles of Walmart in the wee hours of the morning—cross-dressing, flirting, and engaging in other social behaviors prohibited in other public spaces within that community. As she describes it, the store became a site of struggle when the youth confronted gay bashers, and participantswere forced to decide whether to defend or abandon their turf. The use of commercial spaces for political gathering is not historically unique. Classically, the Habermasian (1962) conception of the public sphere emphasized the independence of such spaces fromboth government and corporate interests. As Nancy Fraser reminds us, Jürgen Habermas argued that the public sphere “is not an arena of market relations but rather one of discursive relations, a theater fordebating and deliberating rather than for buying and selling” (1990, 57). Yet, as Tom Standage documents, the coffeehouses that Haber-mas used to illustrate his conception of the public sphere were, after all, commercial establishments, often organized around themes ortopics which allowed them to bring together desired publics whomight wish to use them as their base of operations (2006, 151–165).The proprietors supplied meeting spaces and resources (pamphlets,magazines, newspapers) to sustain conversations and customers. But,ultimately, the coffeehouses were in the business of selling coffee. Thecoffeehouses might be considered branded spaces that worked inWhat Constitutes Meaningful Participation? 173 ways surprisingly similar to the spaces being constructed and soldby Web 2.0 companies. We certainly want to be attentive, as John Edward Campbell (2009)has advocated, to the way such establishments negotiate betweencompeting (and sometimes conflicting) understandings of participants as customers and as citizens. Campbell points to ways “affinity portals” associated with minority groups, such as PlanetOut or Black-Planet, often have to downplay controversial issues that might make them less hospitable to brands. In many cases, though, these establishments—despite their commercial aims—also function as spaces where participants can step outside of their fixed roles and engage in meaningful conversations, identifying shared interests, mutual desires,and collective identities. In order to accept this more morally complex account of collaboration, it’s crucial to move beyond seeing the relations between producersand their audiences as a zero-sum game. Andrejevic moves us in this direction with his critiques of Henry Jenkins’s metaphor of “poaching”(1992) in relation to participants on the fan discussion site Television Without Pity (TWoP). Referring to a passage from Michel de Certeaudescribing readers as moving across “lands belonging to someone else,[. . .] fields they did not write” (1984, 174), Andrejevic argues, The metaphor breaks down in the transition from fields to texts: the consumption of crops is exclusive (or, as economists put it, “rival”),the productive consumption of texts is not. Far from “despoiling” the television texts through their practices, TWoPers enrich them, notjust for themselves but for those who economically benefit from the “added value” produced by the labor of viewers. (2008, 42) As we’ve suggested throughout this book, the owners of those fields do not always welcome and value such contributions and may see them as a threat to their own creative and economic control over those fields. Nevertheless, Andrejevic is right to argue against a binary opposition between “complicit passivity and subversive participation” (43). He points out that the “workplace” where fans labor may at the same time “be a site of community and personal satisfaction and one of economic 174 What Constitutes Meaningful Participation? exploitation” (43). Indeed, fan labor may be exploited for the profit of the “owners,” even as fans also benefit from what they create. Such is the nature of collaboration in the belly of the media beast. We all should approach these emerging structures and practiceswith healthy skepticism, weighing carefully different bids for our participation. The rapid expansion of participatory culture is an ongoing challenge: communities grow faster than their capacity to socialize theirnorms and expectations, and this accelerated scale makes it hard to maintain the intimacy and coherence of earlier forms of participatoryculture. Members are tempted on all sides to embrace practices whichdon’t necessarily align with their own interests; and, yes, participationoften involves some degree of imbrication into commercial logics. But,likewise, networked participation also forces media companies andbrands to be more responsive to their audiences. Networked communities can “call out” companies they collectively perceive as acting counterto the community’s interests, and their access to tools of mobilization and publicity means they can inflict some real damage. Hearing versus Listening Much of the rhetoric around Web 2.0 seeks to conflate the active practices of collaboration and public deliberation with the more passive role of traditional audiences. Tim O’Reilly demonstrates this tendencyin his 2005 essay “What Is Web 2.0?” and his 2009 essay, with John Battelle, “Web Squared: Web 2.0 Five Years On.” Both pieces discuss the need for an “architecture of participation,” which O’Reilly (2005) initially characterizes as “a built-in ethic of cooperation” in which thecompany acts as “an intelligent broker, connecting the edges to each other and harnessing the power of the users themselves.” O’Reillyobscures some important differences between aggregation and deliberation, evading the core issue of whether Web 2.0 companies value participation because of the content consciously submitted or becauseof the data unknowingly shed. While still using the concepts interchangeably, O’Reilly and Battelle’s 2009 report shows far less interest in collective deliberation thanin the aggregation of user data: the “managing, understanding, and responding to massive amounts of user-generated data in real time. What Constitutes Meaningful Participation? 175 [. . .] Our phones and cameras are being turned into eyes and earsfor applications; motion and location sensors tell where we are, what we’re looking at, and how fast we’re moving. Data is being collected, presented, and acted upon in real time. The scale of participationhas increased by orders of magnitude.” If there is intelligence thatemerges from this system, it is machine intelligence and not the socialintelligence of participants. Much as the media industries have long sought ways to “passively” measure audience engagement, fearing the“subjectivity” which occurs when audiences become co-creators ofaudience data, the Web 2.0 paradigm—for all of its empowering rhetoric—increasingly rests on the passive collection of user preferences. O’Reilly and Battelle are celebrating what Mark Andrejevic (2007) has critiqued as a new culture of surveillance which transforms usersinto data sets rather than engaging with them as complex culturalbeings. Valuing participants solely as data returns audiences to a stateof imagined “passivity” rather than acknowledging them as publics, with the capacity to reshape the companies with which they interact. At the heart of our spreadable media model is the idea that audience members are more than data, that their collective discussions anddeliberations—and their active involvement in appraising and circulating content—are generative. While O’Reilly and Battelle minimize the social and qualitativenature of deliberative models, corporate communicators and advertisers are similarly plagued by a focus on “return on investment” that relies on broadcast-era models of measurement. The types of astroturfing described in chapter 1 prioritize easily quantifiable measures (e.g., numbers of views, numbers of followers, numbers of fans) over more qualitative measures of audience engagement and participation.Further, as brands seek to “track” what their audiences say about them,these monitoring programs often lean disproportionately towardaggregation, perpetuating Andrejevic’s culture of surveillance thattoo often views audience members as little more than data points. This reliance on quantitative measures leads to marketing strategiesthat define success by what’s easiest to count (echoing the limitations ofthe stickiness model discussed in the introduction and the challengesof measurement facing the television industry detailed in chapter 3). 176 What Constitutes Meaningful Participation? Measurement is especially important not just for determining whetheran initiative was successful but in defining whatconstitutes success. Ilya Vedrashko—head of research and development for advertising agency Hill Holliday—examines in his essay in the enhancedbook why the advertising industry has had difficulty incorporating a spreadable media approach into their marketing initiatives. He finds that companies and agencies often venture into participatory spaces to ask their traditional questions of “Who is there?” and “How many of them are there?” rather than soliciting new insights and forming new relationships. Such approaches not only assign little value to audience engagement; they also can lead companies to design so-called strategiesthat actually have little strategy at all, to enter online communitiesor platforms without understanding the context of that community or putting thought into how, or why, audiences might want to interact with the company and its content. Sam Ford writes that suchmedia practices lead to “one social media fad after another” (2010e). Describing the “shiny new object” mentality that companies tooktoward virtual world Second Life, he writes that the “vast majorityhad satisfied their goals just by being there and were shocked by the lukewarm response. Unfortunately, the takeaway from Second Lifewasn’t to question the strategy that took companies there in the first place.” Instead, companies have taken the same “gee whiz” approach toFacebook fan pages, mobile applications, and location-based services. To avoid such fallacies, companies must move from a culture of just“hearing” what audiences are saying to one that prioritizes “listening” to what audiences have to say. On an interpersonal level, we all understand the core difference between “hearing” and “listening.” Hearing is the physical act of receiving a message; listening is an active processof waiting for, concentrating on, and responding to a message. Yet, ascompanies talk about “listening,” the term has fallen into the same trapas many otherwise useful words, given the buzzword-driven nature ofmarketing rhetoric. The marketing/public relations version of listeningoften refers to little more than quantitative monitoring—the “who is there?” and “how many of them are there?” sorts of questions thatVedrashko refers to. Such quantitative monitoring has likely become What Constitutes Meaningful Participation? 177 the focus because, as is often the case when measuring people (seeAng 1991), it is easiest to do when the people are removed from the process. Quantifying comments and online discussion and semantically filtering them to determine sentiment promises a more consistentmeasure because the accuracy of gathering data is easier to ascertain and test, the failures of such tools are problems that can conceivably be fixed technologically, and companies can easily hire a platform (a “hearing aid,” if you will) to aggregate that data (Ford 2010a). While companies have spent considerable time perfecting data gathering, on the one hand, and getting corporate messaging out throughtheir “social media touchpoints,” on the other, many have not put as much emphasis on connecting what they say with what they hear. In Chief Culture Officer (2009), Grant McCracken calls on corporations to become “living” and “breathing” entities. While companies have become adept at exhaling their messaging, they are not so good atinhaling what their audiences are saying about them or the issues theyare communicating about. Given how many companies are gasping aggregated audience data, we might imagine them on life support,relying on mechanical devices to inhale outside perspectives, theirintakes narrowed to only those messages the company already knowshow to suck in (Ford 2010a). From the corporate perspective, the more“listening” can resemble survey results, the better. (Or, if companies want qualitative insights, they turn to focus groups—closed, artificialenvironments with agendas under company control.) We do not meanto imply that such research has no place. However, we believe thatturning the active conversations of communities into aggregated data(and thus turning publics into passive audiences) strips these groups of their agency and rejects their capacity for participation. Ultimately, listening demands an active response: not just gatheringdata but doing something about it. Such action might include reaching out in response to what audiences are talking about: thankingthem for their enthusiasm, offering support or additional resources, addressing concerns, and correcting misconceptions. In other cases, it might lead, rather, to internal changes: addressing the needs ofunexpected surplus audiences, the pleas of lead and retro users, the cultural patterns among the communities the company most wants 178 What Constitutes Meaningful Participation? to reach, or points of contention or misunderstanding that can beaddressed through altering communication or business practice. One of the most daunting reasons companies have concentrated primarily on hearing is that they are not really organized to listeneffectively. Media and marketing scholars have long battled to keep audiences from being painted as one passive whole. In that same spirit,we must be careful not to describe organizations as a single, unified entity. Often, the marketing functions of a company have little, if any, connection to IT, legal, or customer service. Each of these divisions reports to a different part of corporate leadership and resides on adifferent campus; their leaders may only be vague acquaintances. To the customer, all these touchpoints constitute “one brand.” Yet,internally, this fractured communication represents contradictory logics and competing measures of success with little internal alignment or collaboration. For instance, while marketing departments are charged and measured by how many ways they can “engage” thecustomer—or, at the very least, collect their “impressions” across various platforms—customer service departments are often measured by how quickly they can disengage with the customer, bymetrics of efficiency (how many calls can be answered in an hour, for example). At one time, these internal “silos” (the popular term to describethis problem in the corporate world) could exist separately because customers had fewer opportunities to speak outside the carefullyorchestrated mechanisms of feedback a company provided. Today,however, when a brand asks audiences to collaborate in a contestto create “user-generated content” or facilitates the customizationand spreading of “official” material, are these activities still withinthe purview of an advertising division or owned by public relations? Such questions are more than just semantics. Corporate infrastructure has created rigid disciplinary divides among these various departments, not only in scope of work but—perhaps most importantly—inbudget. Who “owns” the customer relationship within a company is ultimately a question of who remains relevant and who keeps theirjob. And, as corporate communicators throughout an organizationadjust to a digital age, the tensions and fault lines between departmentsWhat Constitutes Meaningful Participation? 179 shape how brands react to the ethos and practices of what we’re calling spreadable media. Certainly, various divisions of an organization might best beserved to provide somewhat different functions in this media environment—advertisers, for instance, might listen to build, sustain,and make more relevant their marketing campaign; public relations professionals to build relationships and make the company responsiveto conversations happening beyond the company’s marketing; customer service to proactively respond to issues people are having witha company’s products or services (Ford 2010b). However, listening tothe audience is a goal and activity all these departments might share, one which might provide a central point on which to forge new meansof internal communication and collaboration. Most frustrating of all is that many companies don’t truly listenbecause their leadership doesn’t want to. Just as media makers often want to stay within the illusion of a broadcast world, where audiencescould more easily be relegated to being passive individuals ratherthan understood as networked publics, corporate leaders live in a lesscomplicated world when they can simplify how their customers are understood (hence the preference for hearing over listening). Nevertheless, debates are taking place in every corporate boardroombetween prohibitionists who wish to tightly control their intellectual properties and collaborationists who wish to build new relations withtheir audiences (Jenkins 2006b). As Erica Rand suggests in Barbie’sQueer Accessories (1995), there are collaborators inside many companies working to liberalize policies, to enable alternative meanings, or otherwise to shift their relationship with their audiences. They may do so not because they want to “liberate” their audiences but rather because they see these concessions to the public as good businesslogic, or else their personal and professional ethics demand this shift. For these collaborators, shifting from hearing to listening is important because of the potential benefits that can be achieved throughlistening and responding to audiences. As an illustration, take thisexample from the sports gaming community. Fans found that the TigerWoods PGA Tour 08 game from EA Sports had a glitch in it wherein aplayer (playing as the eponymous Tiger Woods) could walk out onto 180 What Constitutes Meaningful Participation? a water hazard and take a shot. Levinator25 was one of those fans,among several, who not only discovered the mistake but uploaded a YouTube video of their performing the shot in the game. When it wastime to promote Tiger Woods PGA Tour 09, agency Wieden+Kennedyuploaded a 30-second video which begins with handheld footage of a computer showing Levinator25’s video, followed by titles that read: Levinator25, You seem to think your Jesus Shot video was a glitch in the game. The spot then features the “real” Tiger Woods hitting his ball into a water hazard. Woods surveys the ball (which is sitting on a lily pad), removes his shoes and socks, and walks out on top of the water to takehis shot. The ad ends with two sentences—“It’s not a glitch. He’s just that good.”—appearing over footage of Woods walking back across the water to the shore. The ad was posted not as a standalone video but as a “response”on YouTube to Levinator25’s upload. Such an approach meant thatW+K, EA Sports, and Woods made their commercial part of the community conversation that was already happening, demonstrating thatthey were paying attention and listening to the community of fansinterested in their games. Such processes can lead to opportunitiesfor companies to respond to their audiences in ways the audienceswantand needand inwaysthat fit the conversations audiences arealready having, where they are having them, in appropriate ways—if the company really listens to and understands the community towhich it is reaching out. However, listening practices are also crucial because the illusion ofthe broadcast world has been shattered. Not proactively listening to what customers or other groups are saying about a company’s brand means not answering a customer service problem before it becomes apublic relations issue or not addressing a concern people have raised with a company’s messaging or business practice until it has already damaged the brand’s reputation. In other words, listening efforts are important for the company’s bottom line not just because they provideWhat Constitutes Meaningful Participation? 181 a foundation for building positive relationships with audiences butalso because they help avoid the types of crises which are becoming increasingly likely when companies ignore what people are sayingabout them or their products.5 For example, beginning in late 2009, Domino’s Pizza dumped its traditional marketing in favor of listening to and addressing whatpeople actually said about their pizza: that it wasn’t very good. Ratherthan continue to ignore this reality, Domino’s addressed it head-on, announcing publicly that it was committing itself to providing better pizza and asking its customers to help in this endeavor. The companyreacted to online conversations about its new pizzas, solicited feedback, and committed to continue addressing issues people still had with Domino’s. It asked audiences to document and send in any bad experience they had with the brand and ran a national advertisingcampaign highlighting what it had done wrong, apologizing, andpledging to fix the problem. A more participatory media environment focuses not only on betterunderstanding and prioritizing the ways media audiences participatebut likewise the activities that media industries and brands must participate in if they want to continue to thrive. In other words, top-downcorporate concepts of “alignment” should be replaced by companies who constantly listen to their audiences and who recalibrate theirinfrastructure to make the company more attuned to address whatthose audiences want and need. Everyday Patterns of Co-Creation If some companies are still learning how to “listen” and respond, networked culture is giving rise to more elaborate (and in some cases,radical) forms of co-creation and “produsage” which further reviseour understanding of the relations between companies and audiences.We might consider these practices as collaboration in a differentsense—that is, working together to achieve something that the participants could not achieve on their own. In our enhanced book, Ana Domb, director of the Interaction Design Program at Universidad Veritas in Costa Rica, describes the complex forms of participation whichhave grown up around the Brazilian popular music form Tecnobrega. 182 What Constitutes Meaningful Participation? Her suggestive case study examines the roles various parties play in sustaining the production and circulation of recorded sound in acontext where many dominant ideas about intellectual property have been suspended. As Domb suggests, these various participants—someamateur, some commercial, some occupying the borderlines betweenthe two—form a value network; their activities are mutually sustaining,each contributing to the value of the overall experience. Within this model, audiences are valued not only as customers withina commercial transaction—as purchasers of recorded music, eventtickets, or branded merchandise—but also as active multipliers whocontribute symbolic value to the Tecnobrega community. Tecnobrega is a musical subculture organized around thousands of large parties a month, where DJs pilot sophisticated and spectacular sound systems with hydraulic platforms and pyrotechnic effects. Equally crucial to thissubculture, however, are the audiences, who organize themselves into “equipes, teams of friends that attend the parties and concerts together.” As Domb describes it, the equipescreate value through their promotionalactivities: circulating music, promoting shows and their favorite acts, creating content (commissioning and composing songs, inventingdances, etc.), and elevating the DJ’s status in the community through public displays of fandom. These roles are significant for the success of the Tecnobrega scene at large. While many of these behaviors have beenincreasingly normalized as the activities of engaged fans, the Tecnobregacontext is illuminating because this audience role is embraced as a meansof sustaining music production in ways which may not be accounted for in conventional understandings of “audiences” or even “fandoms.” Through examining social network sites, collective ventures such asfree and open-source software, and collaborative online spaces such as Wikipedia and Slashdot, Axel Bruns (2008) offers a frameworkfor understanding the different roles audience members play in anetworked society. Importantly for our discussion, Bruns argues for a more fluid category of participation that he labels “produsage”—a merging of “production” and “usage,” undertaken by “produsers”through collaborative processes of creation and re-creation. Built on technical affordances that encourage iterative approaches to tasks, fluidroles and a lack of hierarchy, shared rather than owned material, and What Constitutes Meaningful Participation? 183 granular approaches to problem solving, network society encouragescollaboration on projects by a “hive” community (18–19). This community creates through an “ongoing, perpetually unfinished, iterative,and evolutionary process of gradual development of the informationalresources shared by the community” (20). The blurring of roles that Bruns discusses aptly describes the participation of Tecnobrega’s superfans, who act “not simply as passive consumers, but active users, with some of them participating more strongly with a focus only on their own personal use, some of them participating more strongly in ways which are inherently constructive,and productive of social networks and communal content” (2008,23). Read through Bruns’s framework, the activities of Tecnobregaaudiences in generating crowd interest, promoting shows, distributing recordings through social network sites, and even begging DJsfor recognition at parties, means those fans can be seen as significant creators of the experience they, and other more casual audiences, are enjoying as “the audience.” Domb recognizes that the returns Tecno-brega audiences enjoy come as much from members of other equipesas from the musicians and the event promoters. And, given that the actions of effective equipemembers are rewardedby social status (that is, the more popular your equipeis, the higher you are regarded within the community and the greater your celebrityprofile), it could be argued Tecnobrega rewards through communal evaluation, as Bruns identifies. These parallels are not altogether unexpected—Bruns notes that practices similar to produsage can be identified in older DIY and enthusiast communities (2008, 390). Tecnobrega is a process, not a product—an ongoing scene, not a singularevent. Like other kinds of produsage, the fans’ activity is never finished(27–28). One concert ends, and they begin planning for the next. Practices of liking, recommending, and passing along texts areespecially apparent in places that leverage attention, such as You-Tube, where, Bruns argues, “produsage values” have triumphed over “production values” (2008, 255). There, Bruns notes, produsers playcuratorial and promotional roles, selecting and promoting contentand creating metadata, improving the prospects of the material beingfound by future users. In doing so, he argues that these “produserly” 184 What Constitutes Meaningful Participation? audiences are more likely to select for salience and resonance, undermining traditional media producers who have long relied on highproduction values to distinguish themselves from grassroots andindependent media producers. Increasingly, everyone is making mediaas part of the normal response to reading/listening/viewing ratherthan out of a desire to be media producers in training. Such active audience practices are particularly noticeable, for example, in the popularization of dance crazes. In our enhanced book, KevinDriscoll—doctoral student at the University of Southern California’s Annenberg School for Communication & Journalism—looks at whatmight be learned from the online video phenomenon of staging danceroutines based on Soulja Boy’s 2007 “Crank Dat (Soulja Boy)” video. DeAndre Way, a high school student from rural Mississippi recordingmusic as Soulja Boy Tell ’Em, became something of an overnight sensation in summer 2007 with his track “Crank Dat (Soulja Boy).” Way’strack was one of a number of “snap” tracks posted to music-sharing site Soundclick. As Driscoll explains, snap is a southern hip-hop genrethat deviates “the most from the conventional hip-hop template. Snap’sminimal drum programming and repetitive lyrics destabilized unquestioned hip-hop norms such as the value of complex wordplay and theuse of funk and soul samples.” Way was one of a small number of snapartists posting to Soundclick, each of them reworking a few commonelements to create his own version of Crank Dat. Important to snap and the Crank Dat variation is dancing, a feature that distinguishes it from some other genres of hip-hop. Soulja Boy used his blog and socialnetworking profiles to actively encourage fans to perform and build on his performance, to produce and share videos which remixed his song. This approach drove thousands of song downloads and millionsof views for his MySpace blog, contributing to his signing a contract with a major record label within three months. It is tempting to read Soulja Boy’s success as the tale of a talentedproducer crafting a catchy song and designing an easily imitable dancewhich was then pushed out to the widest possible audience through YouTube. But, as Driscoll notes, the success of Soulja Boy had more to do with the way DeAndre Way engaged audiences to remix and reperform his content, providing “multiple points of entry,” as Driscoll puts it: What Constitutes Meaningful Participation? 185 For a particular cultural artifact to spread, its expressive potential mustbe accessible across seemingly disparate audiences. The Cash Camp clique demonstrated, through their idiosyncraticclothes, slang, dancing,and southern accents, multiple points of entry into the “Crank Dat”phenomenon. And Soulja Boy, by debuting his song as the soundtrackto another group’s homemade dance video, implicitly invited viewers to create further variations. The audiences that took up this invitation kept only the elements they found relevant. They felt free to create newdance steps, to rework the audio, to alter the video, and to introduce their own symbols of local significance. Way encouraged audience transformation of his piece, asking people tospeak back and say something unique through “Crank Dat.” Throughthis process, Soulja Boy acted as “curator, cheerleader, and embodiedsymbol for the collective ‘Crank Dat’ phenomenon,” according toDriscoll, encouraging rather than seeking legal action against fanswho wanted to build on his own creations. As he explains in the song lyrics, “Y’all can’t do it like me / so don’t do it like me.” At each stage, the performer prompted and rewarded audience participation within agenre which has, as Driscoll points out, strong traditions of appropriation, transformation, performativity, and (local) identity expression. The versions, interpretations, adaptations, and mash-ups fans created around “Crank Dat” are examples of audience practices that werealready widespread on YouTube. Regardless of YouTube’s much publicized tagline inviting users to “Broadcast Themselves,” communicationand dialogue rather than broadcasting and self-branding account for a significant amount of the site’s activity. Its architecture allows users to link an uploaded video to an existing one as a “response” and, in the process, to become a direct part of the original video’s circulation.Even the most green vloggers acknowledge their viewers by responding to comments in videos, inviting people to write in, and offering shout-outs that acknowledge other users of the service (Burgess and Green 2009; Lange 2009). Jean Burgess argues, “YouTube is in itself a social network site; one in which videos (rather than “friending”) are the primary medium of social connection between participants” (2008, 102). 186 What Constitutes Meaningful Participation? Furthermore, Burgess suggests that certain videos “act as a hubfor further creative activity by a wide range of participants” (2008,102). These videos are mimicked, copied, mashed up, responded to,emulated, and re-created. They may not be, quantitatively, the “most popular” videos, but they may become more deeply embedded inpopular memory through their repetition and variation. These areoften the videos identified as “memes”—such as Way’s “Crank Dat”or Tay Zonday’s hugely popular YouTube music video for the song“Chocolate Rain.” Discussing the storm of creativity that the latter videoinspired, Burgess notes that “Chocolate Rain”—much like “CrankDat”—featured various ways for audiences to imitate or remix, from the unique baritone vocals to Zonday’s idiosyncratic performanceand the video’s “liner notes”–style subtitles. Bruns’s notion of produsage suggests that those who produce theirown video responses retain their roles as audiences, even while they create and publish content. The same can be said of the people who help to spread these videos and who talk up Soulja Boy. YouTube is one space where we can all watch audiences do the work of being an audience member: the labor of making meaning, of connecting mediawith their lived realities and their personal and interpersonal identities. YouTube is driven in part by the clip and the quote—the short grabor edited selection from other media texts. Such videos are evidence ofaudiences engaging with and appraising content, using it as a resourceto express their personal identities and shared interests. Many industryleaders, however, view these mundane practices as significant threats.For instance, Brian Grazer, producer of 8 Mile, said of a mash-up of his film and Napoleon Dynamite, “It bothers me artistically. Here’s thisthing where you have no control; they are chopping it up and putting your memories in a blender” (quoted in Holson 2007). Meanwhile,Medialink Worldwide CEO and president Laurence Moskowitz said of copyright infringement in 2007 that “the genie has to be put back in the bottle, or the entire economics of the entertainment industry on a global basis are subject to ruinous counterfeiting” (quoted inWhitney 2007). Both statements point toward the media industries’ conflation of blatant piracy—thereproduction of a workin fullforsome degree of commercial gain—and a variety of fan activities that What Constitutes Meaningful Participation? 187 comment on, critique, recommend, or make new creative statementsusing some portion of an existing work. These are the kinds of practices John Hartley describes as “redaction”—the production of “new material by a process of editing existingcontent” (2008, 112). While quoting has become an accepted form of the circulation of printed material online (blogs regularly quote fromand then link back to one another, for instance), many companies arenot yet equipped to embrace the value generated through audiovisualquotes or other forms of transformative work as a means of incorporating their material into larger, ongoing conversations. In a world where if it doesn’t spread, it’s dead, if it can’t be quoted,it might not mean anything. The social practices of spreadable media necessitate material that is quotable—providing easy ways for audiencesto be able to excerpt from that material and to share those excerpts withothers—and grabbable—providing the technological functions whichmake that content easily portable and sharable. The ability to easilyembed videos from the site into other online forums has been key to YouTube’s success. Such grabbability is often a key factor in how materialspreads. For example, Emma F. Webb (2011) has explored how online videos are often used as a reference point or illustration in soap opera fan discussions and critiques. These appropriations arenot simply produced by audiences; they are generating audiences through heighteningpopular awareness of the programs being quoted and, more importantly,sustaining audiences through fueling ongoing conversations. The Problem of Unequal Participation The gains made in making the communication environment moreparticipatory for some people have not been the inevitable consequence of the introduction of new digital technologies and networkedcommunications. They emerge from the choices made, and whichcontinue to be made, about how new tools and platforms are deployed.A 2006 study by the Pew Internet & American Life Project (Lenhart et al. 2007) found that people in households that earned $75,000 or more per year were three times more likely to produce and shareInternet content than those whose annual household income wasless than $30,000. These inequalities keep expanding: as low-income 188 What Constitutes Meaningful Participation? U.S. residents have gained access to networked computers throughschools and public libraries, their wealthier counterparts have gainedaccess to broadband and enjoy unlimited access from their homes(Livingstone and Bober 2005). Wikipedians talk about “systemic bias,” that is, the ways that thecontent creation in their grassroots project is limited and unbalancedby the demographics of who participates and who doesn’t. Whileoriginating as a term among Wikipedians, “systemic bias” shapes all Web 2.0 platforms. It matters when more Asian American contributors have risen to the top ranks on YouTube than African Americans or when user-moderated sites lack mechanisms that promote diversity of perspectives. In each of these cases, the affordances of theseplatforms may seem neutral in their design but not in their effectsbecause technological “fixes” cannot overcome other factors that shapethe relative access of different groups to cultural and communicative power. Limited online participation may reflect a lack of disposable time, especially among those who lack digital access in the workplace,just as it reflects a lack of disposable income (Seiter 2008). Thus, this lack of participation might persist when one has technical accessbut not the skills and cultural knowledge required to fully take part. Further, those who do not know anyone who uses the Internet toengage in participatory culture practices may lack meaningful rolemodels to inspire their own use of the technologies and platforms.6 Changes in these inequalities are unlikely to come from corporations focusing on “underserved markets,” an approach which presumesthat the primary drivers of the new media landscape are economic andthat we should be courted as customers first rather than as communitymembers. Nor will it come from public service projects designed to ensure access to technologies but not training for the skills required tomeaningfully participate. Obtaining Internet access for public schoolsand libraries in the United States was touted as helping to close the “digital divide” during the presidency of Bill Clinton, but governmentalpolicy at all levels has sought to significantly limit access to socialnetwork sites and video-sharing platforms or to impose mandatory filters on web content rather than developing skills for negotiatingthese spaces. What Constitutes Meaningful Participation? 189 Many of the most powerful efforts to broaden participation haveinstead come from communities working together to overcome constraints on their communication capacities. Sasha Costanza-Chock(2010), for instance, has described the emergence of new media strategies and tactics among Latin groups in Southern California as “transmedia mobilization,” a strategy which taps into any and all available mediaplatforms to spread its message. Historically, these immigrant rights activists have courted coverage through Anglo mass media with limitedsuccess: their messagewas often marginalized or distorted. The rise of ethnicbroadcast media in California, especiallySpanish-language radioand television, has granted these immigrant rights groups broader butstill centralized access to the channels of communication. While the Locutores—the hosts of Spanish-language talk-radioprograms—still play the greatest role in mobilizing immigrant rights supporters to participate in protest marches, Costanza-Chock notes a growing deployment of social media and participatory practices, especially among younger activists but spreading across the movement as activists have come to recognize the ways that such digital practices canlower costs and expand their reach. As he explains, “Transmedia mobilization thus marks a transition in the role of movement communicatorsfrom content creation to aggregation, curation, remix and circulation of rich media texts through networked movement formations” (2010). Transmedia mobilization takes advantage of the community’slatent communications capabilities. Costanza-Chock describes how immigrants in Los Angeles had been early adopters of video cameras,collectively recording major community events—such as festivals,weddings, funerals, and concerts—and mailing the tapes back totheir hometowns as a way of sustaining family and community ties across geographic distances. More recently, the use of video-sharing sites online has supplemented the physical shipping of tapes. These same practices get deployed when immigrant rights activists record and upload footage of protests or talks by community leaders about their struggles. (Many of these digital skills are then passed informally between friends and co-workers, while young people who haveacquired new media literacies through schools end up teaching their parents and grandparents.) 190 What Constitutes Meaningful Participation? As the value of transmedia mobilization has become clearer, many traditional activist and labor groups in the U.S. have begun providing training in new media skills to their memberships, often in the service of producing media that may spread their messages into othersegments of the community. For example, Costanza-Chock documents a project called Radio Tijeras which trained garment workers in audio production practices (2010, 174). Participants creatednewscasts, recorded poems, generated public service announcements,and captured oral history. They mixed their own productions withpopular music in creating discos volantes(CD audio magazines) to bedistributed inside downtown Los Angeles garment sweatshops. Moregenerally, participation in the production and circulation of movement messages strengthens ties and heightens engagement within thecause, allowing participants a greater sense of ownership over what was produced and a greater sense of involvement in the outcome. The message may spread through Facebook pages and Twitter postings, talk radio and audio magazines, street art and oratory. Often, thesame content gets repurposed or remixed as it travels across platforms.Hybrid systems of communication, especially those between higher- and lower-tech media, bridge literacy gaps in immigrant communities.To cite a historical example, Jewish immigrants working in sweatshopsin New York at the turn of the twentieth century would hire someoneto read books, newspapers, and magazines aloud to them while they worked (Howe and Libo 1983). Turning to a more recent example,bloggers in Beirut during the 2006 Lebanon War created compelling drawings and graphics which could be printed out and posted bydigitally connected supporters in Lebanese immigrant communities around the world, thus conveying their message to people who mightlack both digital access and media literacy skills required to followthe blogs themselves (Jenkins 2006a). There is a strong tradition in policy literature about the developingworld of talking about “appropriate technologies”—that is, technologies which accommodate the skills and needs of local populations, aresustainable, respect their environments, and take full advantage of theaffordances of often limited technical infrastructures and resources. Many times, these practices straddle media, often bridging between What Constitutes Meaningful Participation? 191 diverse populations while ensuring the communication of core messages. Such practices frequently involve the interplay between low- andhigh-tech cultures, such as that which John Fiske (1994) describes in his work on the ways pirate radio functioned in the African American and immigrant communities of Los Angeles in the wake of the 1992 L.A. riots. In that instance, participants used grassroots media to contest dominant media framings of the uprisings and to question police authority, in the process often reading aloud and debatingprinted accounts which might not have been accessible to the entire community. Costanza-Chock’s more recent account of immigrantrights activism suggests that a similarly hybrid system of communication continues to function within Los Angeles, challenging and supplementing mass-media representations through more locallyconstructed and participatory forms of messaging. Yet it is telling that Costanza-Chock, in his study, describes many ofthese communication practices as remaining within the Latin immigrant community. Participants in the immigrant rights movement, heargues, believe that they have little chance of reaching Anglo audiences or that they will find little support there, given the demagogic anti-immigrant rhetoric which runs through some English-languagetelevision and talk-radio programs. While these groups sometimesuse social media to find common cause with other immigrant populations who are engaged in similar struggles, they frequently receive little or no response from mainstream media that could help themreach and persuade Anglo audiences about the justness of their cause.Thus, we find in the immigrant rights movement a rich example ofhow media texts spread (across generations, across platforms, across national borders) and when and why they do not (across ideological and class divides, across language barriers, and especially across the closed minds of many people outside the movement). Meanwhile, other researchers have found that online social networks can be as much if not more segregated than social networks in the physical world. As danah boyd (2011) and S. Craig Watkins (2010)have documented, Facebook and other social network sites oftenoperate as the digital equivalent of gated communities, protectingparticipants from online contact with people outside their social circle192 What Constitutes Meaningful Participation? as much as enabling easier and quicker communications with their friends and families. Both boyd and Watkins argue that people choosebetween Facebook and MySpace based on their economic aspirationsand educational status, often using language heavily coded in class andracial terms to describe what they dislike about the other platform.Watkins compares this process to the “big sort,” which has reintroduced segregation in many U.S. cities through residential patterns. How seriously we take these inequalities of access and opportunitydepends very much on what we see as the value of participation. If, likesome skeptics, we see participatory culture as “consumptive behavior by a different name,” then we should, as a former Federal Communications Commissioner suggested, see the digital divide as no more consequential than the gap in who owns fancy cars. If we see participatoryculture, though, as a vital step toward the realization of a century-longstruggle for grassroots communities to gain greater control over the means of cultural production and circulation—if we see participationas the work of publics and not simply of markets and audiences—thenopportunities to expand participation are struggles we must actively embrace through our work, whether through efforts to lower economicand technical obstacles or to expand access to media literacies. (Thesedebates become very real when low-income school districts struggle over whether to spend their sparse budgets on teachers, textbooks, or computers.) And, if we see the current moment as one of “collaboration”or co-creation—that is, if we see it as involving more complex relationsbetween companies and audiences—we have all the more reason to expand the struggle over the terms of our participation. Our exampleshere (ranging from Tecnobrega in Brazil to “snap” videos on YouTubeand the immigrant rights struggles in Los Angeles) all suggest ways that our public sphere has been enriched through the diversification of who has the means to create and share culture. When we describe our culture as becoming more participatory,we are speaking in relative terms—participatory in relation to older systems of mass communication—and not in absolute terms. We do not and may never live in a society where every member is able to fullyparticipate, where the lowest of the low has the same communicative capacity as the most powerful elites. Insofar as participation within What Constitutes Meaningful Participation? 193 networked publics becomes a source of discursive and persuasivepower—and insofar as the capacities to meaningfully participateonline are linked to educational and economic opportunities—then the struggle over the right to participation is linked to core issues of social justice and equality. As we’ve seen here, the nature of participation in the digital edge isa complicated matter. For even those groups who have greater access to digital technologies and have mastered the skills to deploy them effectively toward their own end, our capacity to participate can be complicated by issues of who owns the platforms through whichcommunication occurs and how their agendas shape how those toolscan be deployed. And, even if we get our messages through, there is often a question of whether anyone is listening. None of this allows us to be complacent about the current conditions of networked communications, even if the expanded opportunities for participation giveus reasons for hope and optimism. What we are calling spreadability starts from an assumption that circulation constitutes one of the key forces shaping the media environment. It comes also from a belief that, if we can better understandthe social and institutional factors that shape the nature of circulation, we may become more effective at putting alternative messages into circulation (a goal which brings us back to Enzensberger’s talk of “aggressive forms of publicity”). This chapter has looked at theshapes that participation takes in societies increasingly using digital tools to communicate and gather. In chapter 5, we will argue thatwhat spreads in this participatory environment is what John Fiske(1989b) might call the “producerly,” texts which constitute resources that participatory communities deploy in their interactions with eachother. In doing so, we move between a focus on the properties of the networked audience and the properties of texts which are increasinglybeing designed to spread through social network sites, whether bybrands seeking to reach current or potential customers or by activistsseeking to reach supporters. 194 What Constitutes Meaningful Participation? 