Copyright @ 2014. Laurence King Publishing. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/18/2019 1:53 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES AN: 926193 ; Coates, Kathryn, Ellison, Andy.; An Introduction to Information Design Account: undeloan.main.ehost6This chapter shows how designers try out several routes to visualize information before deciding on what they believe to be the best answer to the design brief. Experimentation in all of its forms, whether by using new technologies in ways for which they were not designed, or taking inspiration from a variety of sources, including those outside the subject of graphic design, is valuable and valid. It is through this experimentation that designers produce unforeseen results. Chapter 6: Experimentation and inspiration for the design process Copyright @ 2014. Laurence King Publishing. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/18/2019 1:53 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES AN: 926193 ; Coates, Kathryn, Ellison, Andy.; An Introduction to Information Design Account: undeloan.main.ehost136 Chapter 6 Why is experimentation and inspiration important? Student project by Sophie Garwell: D&AD/Diesel competition entry, 2011 This project was created in response to a Designers & Art Directors’ (D&AD) competition brief set by the well-known brand Diesel to illustrate two songs by an artist chosen by the student. The idea was to explore new and imaginative ways in which design and illustration could be integrated into the music experience. Sophie selected two tracks she loved, ‘Festival’ by Sigur Rós and ‘Animal Arithmetic’ by Jonsi. Her response to the brief was to create an experimental illustrative book for each track that attempts to visually describe and communicate the music. The diff ering formats of the books refl ect the structure of each track; the compositions of the visuals attempt to capture the mood, volume, rhythm and pace of each piece. They explore the possibility of the visual representation of music. As a starting point, Sophie mapped out the pitch and volume of the songs, paying particular attention to the instrumental layers. She used this as the basis to create an appropriate visual palette, experimenting with diff erent colours, textures, materials and surfaces to use within the piece. She comments, ‘The fi rst half [of the song] is very slow and subtle, so I took soft textures to mirror the map of movements I had made. The second is much more beat-orientated with layering of instruments.’ The fi nal pieces refl ect the points of diff erence within the music and between each track. A single page represents 30 seconds of music in visual form; when ‘read’ at this pace while listening to the music it creates a multi-sensory experience for the audience. This illustrative interpretation of musical data is the result of extensive experimentation and exploration around two pieces of music that Sophie found particularly inspirational. What is the point of experimentation within the design process? Experimentation sits at the heart of the creative process. As designers we look for new ways of doing, making and ultimately communicating information and ideas. The desire to experiment is fuelled by curiosity: we look, we see, we respond to the world around us; our situations and circumstance, our likes and dislikes, our interests and experiences all shape and infl uence our work. When we are experimenting we are asking questions and seeking answers. We can’t expect to instinctively ‘know’ the best way to resolve a problem, so we ask questions of the brief and we explore and experiment to fi nd the most appropriate answers. This is an essential part of the design process; it can lead to exciting and unexpected solutions, taking the designer into new territories that challenge the established or expected methods of communication. It can lead to new ways of doing and thinking, and new and exciting design directions and opportunities to engage and communicate with an audience. The willingness to explore and experiment also helps you establish and defi ne your own style and beliefs, and to fi nd out who you are as a designer. The work we admire from our peers captures something unique. It has personality, individuality and it goes beyond the norm; it pushes or challenges the established boundaries and presents something new and unexpected. As individuals, our experiences, opinions, inspirations and infl uences are all diff erent. These will (and should) shape our approach to the way we design. Where we live or grew up, the political, social and economic climate, our beliefs and opinions, the music we like, the artists or architects we admire are all sources of inspiration and should be embraced when we are engaged in the creative process. ‘Of course design is about problem-solving, but I cannot resist adding something personal as well.’ Wim Crouwel (b. 1928), graphic designer Copyright @ 2014. Laurence King Publishing. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/18/2019 1:53 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES AN: 926193 ; Coates, Kathryn, Ellison, Andy.; An Introduction to Information Design Account: undeloan.main.ehostExperimentation and inspiration for the design process 137 Previous page, above and right: Sophie Garwell’s response to a D&AD/Diesel competition brief: ‘The books are a visual description of the music of Sigur Rós and its emotive dynamics. The songs are built up with many layers of instruments, pitch and tempo, creating a unique atmosphere, which I translated into a visual format. The books follow the path of the music from start to fi nish in an attempt to be a visual accompaniment to such rich musical qualities.’ Copyright @ 2014. Laurence King Publishing. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/18/2019 1:53 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES AN: 926193 ; Coates, Kathryn, Ellison, Andy.; An Introduction to Information Design Account: undeloan.main.ehost138 Chapter 6 Lateral thinking Psychologist Edward de Bono conceived the term ‘lateral thinking’ in 1967. In simple terms it involves thinking beyond the obvious solution, sometimes termed ‘thinking outside the box’. He summarizes the approach as, ‘you cannot dig a hole in a diff erent place by digging the same hole deeper’. By this he means that changing direction cannot be achieved by putting more eff ort into one approach. Lateral thinking means not just accepting the pieces of a puzzle you have been given but seeking to change them. It is a technique used to shake people out of their complacency to produce something unique instead of coming up with predictable solutions. Lateral thinking is important in information design as there is a perception that dealing with large amounts of data is relatively boring. If not presented correctly, information becomes just numbers and words with little meaning. The ability to visualize this raw data and place it into a visual form that demonstrates relationships or diff erences can change the audience’s understanding of the subject. Lateral thinking can be used through the process of visual exploration. In this phase designers experiment with diff erent media, materials and ways of presenting the raw information. During this process, creatives move beyond initial concepts and explore avenues outside of the obvious choices. This can result in more innovative solutions to the problem. By sketching and prototyping, the designer can investigate various methods to present the message, using diagrams, grids, typography and imagery. This allows the information designer to compare methods in order to select the most appropriate technique. It is during this phase that many designers ‘play’ with the visualization. Play means diff erent things to diff erent people, but psychologist Bruno Bettelheim defi ned it as ‘freedom from all but personally imposed rules (which can be changed at will) by freewheeling fantasy involvement and by the absence of any goals outside the activity itself’ (‘The Importance of Play’, Atlantic Monthly, March 1987, p. 37). Playing can result in happy accidents and keep the approach fresh and vibrant. It can involve playing with images by making collages or montages or using unfamiliar tools and design techniques. Student project by Stephen Woowat: Urban First Aid, 2004 An example of lateral thinking is the Urban First Aid project by British graphic designer Stephen Woowat, produced when he was a student. The brief was to communicate information about roads in the city. Stephen used lateral thinking to liken the transport infrastructure of a city to that of a human circulatory system. The ring road has become the main arteries in the heart of the system. Using this simple metaphor, the reader understands the importance of roads in the city as they provide links to the outside world, bringing in valuable commodities such as food, as well as exporting waste products. If this system gets clogged, the circulation of goods slows down and causes major problems. The visual solution is presented in the form of an installation, which uses the fl oor plan to show the road structure. On top of this, Stephen has used the vernacular of medical graphic design to diagnose key areas of congestion and prescribe solutions such as a bypass or rail networks to alleviate the problems. The idea that any potential problems could be diagnosed and dealt with equates town planners to doctors, as they can both alleviate problems and repair them through intervention or surgery. This way of presenting the information helps the viewer to remember the message: it is a clever idea, presented not just as facts and fi gures, that engages the audience. Copyright @ 2014. Laurence King Publishing. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/18/2019 1:53 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES AN: 926193 ; Coates, Kathryn, Ellison, Andy.; An Introduction to Information Design Account: undeloan.main.ehostExperimentation and inspiration for the design process 139 Stephen Woowat’s Urban First Aid project, 2004, which uses lateral thinking to liken the ring road around a city to that of the circulatory system of a human heart. Copyright @ 2014. Laurence King Publishing. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/18/2019 1:53 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES AN: 926193 ; Coates, Kathryn, Ellison, Andy.; An Introduction to Information Design Account: undeloan.main.ehost140 Chapter 6 Inspiration for design Designers are inspired by a multitude of things: it could be an environment they have experienced, such as the city they live in or their travels abroad; it may be a building, a piece of architecture, an artist and their work or their philosophy and beliefs, a particular cultural movement, a belief or ideology, a piece of music, poetry or the written word. It may be old signage, tickets collected from around the world, or sweet wrappers. In short, inspiration can be found everywhere! We absorb our surroundings both subconsciously and consciously. As designers we should be looking, recording, collecting, drawing and photographing the things that surround us. The things that capture our interest may become the inspirations that drive and inform our work. Evidence of this can be found throughout design history and in the work of many of the designers featured in earlier chapters. When fi rst studying Fine Arts at the Academie Minerva in Groningen, the Netherlands, legendary graphic designer Wim Crouwel said he was more inspired by the building (the fi rst modernist building in Holland) than by the work that went on within it. Crouwel is known for the ‘architectural’ use of space in his design work, and there is no doubt that this early inspiration shaped his subsequent work. In the late 1950s he read the book Grid Systems in Graphic Design by Josef Müller-Brockmann (see Chapter 3), and this too inspired his use of the grid in his posters. These are just two examples of the many infl uences on his work. Müller-Brockmann also looked beyond his own fi eld for inspiration: ‘What pleases me is that I have always sought what is better, that I have still remained selfcritical, and that I am still interested in things outside my own fi eld. My library is the expression of my curiosity. I would advise young people to look at everything they encounter in a critical light and try to fi nd a better solution.’ Josef Müller-Brockmann, in an interview with Yvonne Schwemer-Scheddin, © Eye magazine, 2001 Copyright @ 2014. Laurence King Publishing. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/18/2019 1:53 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES AN: 926193 ; Coates, Kathryn, Ellison, Andy.; An Introduction to Information Design Account: undeloan.main.ehostExperimentation and inspiration for the design process 141 US designer David Carson, who is best known for his infl uential magazine designs, is also clear on the potential sources of inspiration: The world that surrounds a designer can shape his or her ideas. The agency Idiom in Bangalore looked to Otl Aicher’s 1972 Munich Olympics pictograms (see p. 41) and to Sanjhi, a form of Indian folk art, when they were commissioned to design the pictograms for the 2010 Commonwealth Games in Delhi. The shape of the logo for the 2016 Olympic Games in Rio, created by design studio Tátil, was inspired by the Brazilian environment; it is based on the famous Rio landmark of Sugarloaf Mountain. Look around you, think, respond, and be curious. Being open to the infl uences and inspirations that surround you is essential to creating work that has a sense of personality and individuality; something that can make the work distinct and unique. To give you some examples of how this awareness can inspire and drive the direction and content of projects, we show the work of William Cottam and Holly Langford, two recent graphic design graduates from Nottingham Trent University. These illustrate how a personal interest in or response to an issue can provide the basis for interesting and compelling visual communications. ‘My environment always infl uences me. I’m always taking photos and I believe the things I see and experience infl uence my work. … I think it is really important that designers put themselves into the work. No one else has your background, upbringing, life experiences, and if you can put a bit of that into your work, two things will happen; you’ll enjoy the work more and you’ll do your best work.’ David Carson, Layers magazine, 2007 Copyright @ 2014. Laurence King Publishing. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/18/2019 1:53 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES AN: 926193 ; Coates, Kathryn, Ellison, Andy.; An Introduction to Information Design Account: undeloan.main.ehostCopyright @ 2014. Laurence King Publishing. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/18/2019 1:53 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES AN: 926193 ; Coates, Kathryn, Ellison, Andy.; An Introduction to Information Design Account: undeloan.main.ehostExperimentation and inspiration for the design process 143 Student project by William Cottam: Revealed, 2010 While walking around the city centre of Nottingham, William began to notice the number of CCTV cameras located in a very small area. On further investigation he discovered there were very few locations where one was not being watched within this area, yet people seemed unconcerned – or maybe they were just unaware. Many people assume that the reason for the cameras is to reduce crime; however, evidence indicates that CCTV is not eff ective in reducing or solving crime. So who is watching us and why? Shouldn’t modern citizens feel trusted to go about their daily lives in a law-abiding manner? Isn’t camera surveillance just another form of spying and an infringement and erosion of our civil liberties? William decided he should use his skills as a graphic designer to initiate a response to this issue and create a campaign to stop the expansion of CCTV. He experimented and explored the best way to communicate this information. After trying and testing several routes it was clear that using a well-known area within the city as the basis for his campaign would off er the most eff ective and compelling content as well as providing a meaningful context for the fi nal communications. Many people would have walked, shopped or sat waiting to catch a bus without realizing that their every move was being watched. A poster mapping the location of CCTV cameras within the area was created; the visual language of existing warning posters was utilized and new versions produced carrying an alternative warning message to the public. Finally, a set of ‘opinionated postcards’ were made to reinforce the message of the campaign. William experimented in his design process to fi nd an appropriate and balanced visual language and tone to communicate with. Measuring the right tone and selecting the most eff ective formats to carry a message or information is a vital part of the overall design process. In many instances this can only be established through active experimentation with materials, media and formats, and testing how these diff erent approaches communicate with the desired audience. Copyright @ 2014. Laurence King Publishing. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/18/2019 1:53 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES AN: 926193 ; Coates, Kathryn, Ellison, Andy.; An Introduction to Information Design Account: undeloan.main.ehost144 Chapter 6 Student project by Holly Langford: Local Heroes, 2010 This project was a campaign created in an attempt to bring together urban communities in the East Midlands, to raise awareness within the community of individuals who have acted in challenging situations rather than turning a blind eye. Its ambition was to tackle the attitude of ‘someone else will help’. The campaign set out to communicate directly with the audience in their environment. The sites selected were in urban areas where the street lighting was poor. Holly had discovered through her research and exploration the eff ectiveness of good lighting as a tool to deter crime. As a result the project developed two purposes: ‘To take the message to the street and create an impact, I projected stories of local heroes’ great achievements into the areas where they live. This idea was based on the fact that street lighting is more eff ective than CCTV at fi ghting crime. So by projecting the stories they are inspiring hope and are also protecting the area.’ Holly created the Local Heroes brand with the hope that it would inspire people, improve the sense of community spirit, ownership and strength. The brand would extend across other platforms as it progressed, using both direct mail and an interactive interface to engage people. The direct mail would be an annual publication that would celebrate ‘Heroes’ and their stories, bringing the local heroes to the attention of a national audience. The proposed website and app would off er people the opportunity to post their stories. The interface is live and charts each story’s location and details on a national map. As time passes, the online community grows and the map fi lls with locators that can be clicked to gain access to the story; it is a ‘good news’ site, an online beacon bringing positivity and hope. Copyright @ 2014. Laurence King Publishing. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/18/2019 1:53 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES AN: 926193 ; Coates, Kathryn, Ellison, Andy.; An Introduction to Information Design Account: undeloan.main.ehostExperimentation and inspiration for the design process 145 This project was the result of a great deal of research, experimentation and development in Holly’s fi nal year. She tried out numerous ideas before settling on this approach. Holly went out into the local community with projectors and set up the environmental graphics to see if the idea of using light as part of the message delivery would work. She tested out her ideas and analyzed and adapted the outcomes according to her fi ndings. Her use of media is driven by experimentation; she uses established channels to communicate where appropriate but also exploits the potential of new media alongside this to ensure eff ective delivery of the message. So far we have looked at student projects within these pages, but this does not mean that these are the only projects where inspiration and experimentation play a key role! The practices we begin as students will continue throughout our careers as professional designers. If we maintain the willingness to look, explore and experiment with ideas and approaches to our work we will continue to evolve, and new ideas may be found or inspired by a multitude of things. Copyright @ 2014. Laurence King Publishing. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/18/2019 1:53 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES AN: 926193 ; Coates, Kathryn, Ellison, Andy.; An Introduction to Information Design Account: undeloan.main.ehost146 Chapter 6 Editing data for inspiration Data is collected from a variety of sources. Increasingly, our experiences are documented through data that is collected on the most mundane of items, such as our mobile phones. How many calls we make, their duration, the number of text messages, even how many photographs we have taken and where, along with what music we have listened to, all go some way to recording our daily lives. The data tells stories about us. It is the job of the information designer to edit and interpret these stories visually for the audience to clearly understand. The designer fi lters out the unnecessary information and concentrates on fi nding the interesting points, so that the story is communicated succinctly without any interference. Information designers explore and understand data through visualization. By presenting facts, fi gures or statistics in space rather than as numbers or text, the viewer fi nds it easier to understand. Humans have an innate ability to recognize patterns and relationships. When information is depicted visually, these relationships and patterns become easier to identify. The designer has the task of disassembling the data, analyzing it and then reassembling it in a simplifi ed form. By doing this the stories buried within the data become visible through the graphic abilities the designer employs, such as navigation and abstraction. The facts and the interrelationships between them become transparent. 2010–2011 annual report by Nicholas Felton. Creative use of data: Nicholas Felton Nicholas Felton and his annual reports are a prime example of how showing data creatively tells stories. Felton documents personal events, such as social relationships, travel, food and emotions for each year, and presents them as a printed document. This began in 2004, when Nicholas produced an end-of-year report called ‘Best of 04’. In it he included some statistics about his year, such as how many air miles he had travelled. The following year he produced his fi rst annual report. Within the report he detailed several categories he thought would be of interest to family and friends. These included his photographs, music he had listened to and books he had read throughout the year. By 2007 he was documenting his habits scrupulously. Online services such as Flickr and Last FM kept records of his photographic experiences and listening habits, while his computer calendar kept records of meetings and events. Along with information from free sites about weather and maps, Felton compiled a huge amount of information about his daily life. He then input the data into spreadsheets to enable comparisons and patterns to be identifi ed within the material. Once the focal points had been identifi ed he began the design phase. He says: ‘My chief concern is that the fi nished graphic should be highly scannable and easily digested. For me this means the elimination of keys and fi ddly lines attaching labels to items. Relationships should be as direct and unadorned as possible’ (IDN magazine interview, 2008, vol. 15, no. 4, p. 32). In his 2010 annual report, Nicholas documented his father’s life after he had passed away. It was compiled from the physical ephemera, such as calendars, slides and other artifacts, in his possession. Nicholas has since published a stunning report for 2010/2011. Copyright @ 2014. Laurence King Publishing. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/18/2019 1:53 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES AN: 926193 ; Coates, Kathryn, Ellison, Andy.; An Introduction to Information Design Account: undeloan.main.ehostExperimentation and inspiration for the design process 147 Copyright @ 2014. Laurence King Publishing. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/18/2019 1:53 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES AN: 926193 ; Coates, Kathryn, Ellison, Andy.; An Introduction to Information Design Account: undeloan.main.ehost148 Chapter 6 Copyright @ 2014. Laurence King Publishing. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/18/2019 1:53 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES AN: 926193 ; Coates, Kathryn, Ellison, Andy.; An Introduction to Information Design Account: undeloan.main.ehostExperimentation and inspiration for the design process 149 The importance of trying out ideas Once the data has been collected and edited, the information is used to generate ideas. In this phase, the designer attempts several concepts in order to communicate the data. The designer will often explore structure, image and typography, developing grids, styles of imagery and typographic elements, which will help the clear communication of the message. The more ideas the designer generates, the greater the ability to compare their eff ectiveness and analyze the possibilities to ensure they are fi t for purpose. Sketching is one of the most immediate ways for a designer to explore their ideas by visually building and refi ning them. It is a valuable tool to rough out and develop ideas for a brief. It is simple and cheap and the process allows the designer to resolve issues quickly. Some designers keep sketchbooks to develop ideas; others work on separate sheets of paper. Whichever method is used, the premise of refi ning through progressive drawing remains the same. 2010–2011 annual report by Nicholas Felton. Copyright @ 2014. Laurence King Publishing. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/18/2019 1:53 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES AN: 926193 ; Coates, Kathryn, Ellison, Andy.; An Introduction to Information Design Account: undeloan.main.ehost150 Chapter 6 Trying out ideas: Tanya Holbrook Tanya Holbrook is a designer for Fallon in London. While studying for her degree in graphic design she completed a project that mapped her carbon footprint for the year 2007. This project looked at the journeys she had undertaken within that year, such as walking, driving and fl ying. While developing the project, Tanya tried out several ways to interpret the data she had collected. It had to be analyzed and edited to pick out the most relevant facts and statistics in order to tell the story of her travels for the year. Certain pieces of information appeared too detailed, others not detailed enough. The comparison of local, national and international had to be made and then some way to portray the data coherently to an audience had to be found. She analyzed the mileage from her cars, looked at the travel tickets she had kept and also looked at the work of other designers. She went through the data and edited it, looking at various stereotypical ways that most designers would use to depict it. The process of editing can be very diffi cult, as the designer is trying to select facts, fi gures or statistics that indicate relationships or facilitate some sort of comparison. Just telling someone you have travelled 20,000 miles in a year in your car doesn’t mean much until you realize the national average is 8,000 miles. The data needs to be set in context to make it meaningful. The sketchbook Tanya produced for this project is interesting because she has included her references from contemporary design along with drawings and notes on the data that helped her arrive at her fi nal solution. Since the project was about distance travelled and destinations, the inclusion of a map was explored to give a sense of distance and direction. Tanya experimented with how much of the map she could show without it becoming the focal point of the information. By reducing and simplifying the map, Tanya was able to suggest distances by looking at the relative positioning between destinations and their orientation to each other. She decided to use directional lines to suggest the pathways and used diff erent thicknesses to denote frequency. All of this was arrived at through a process of trial and error in the sketchbook, constantly analyzing and evaluating the visuals to make sure they communicated the key information clearly and consistently. The fi nal poster Copyright @ 2014. Laurence King Publishing. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/18/2019 1:53 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES AN: 926193 ; Coates, Kathryn, Ellison, Andy.; An Introduction to Information Design Account: undeloan.main.ehost.......... ...................... .................. .................... .................... ........................................ .............. .................... ............ .................. .......... .................. ...................... ...................... .............. .............. .............................. ............ .................. .............. .................. ................ ........................ .............. ...................... ............................ .............. ............ .......................... .................. .......................... ........................ ............ ........................ .......................... .................... ........ ............................ .............. .................. .......................... .................. ............ .......................... ................ .................. .................. ................ ........ .......... ........ .............................................................................. .................................... ................................................................................................ .......... Experimentation and inspiration for the design process 151 is produced in black, white and shades of grey and uses minimal text. Tanya has commented that although she likes the poster aesthetically, the process of designing it was far more interesting and challenging. The project shows that there are stories hidden in seemingly mundane data. She realized that she had driven a half-mile stretch of road between her home and college an awful lot. It made her more aware of her habits and behaviour. Today, devices such as the Nike+ Sportswatch GPS are tracking, recording and presenting data. Through sensors, the watch records calories burnt, location and distance moved. As a result it can tell our stories automatically. Opposite, top: In her sketchbook, alongside a map, Tanya looks at destinations and relative distances travelled locally and develops icons for mode of transport. Opposite, centre: The development work continues by looking at radial designs to map out and categorize daily routines and the amount of time spent walking, driving, running, etc. Opposite, bottom: Radial design exploring the time spent undertaking diff erent activities in a day. Left: Tanya’s fi nal design, which demonstrates the various destinations visited in a year, the mode of transport, frequency of visits and amount of time spent at each one. Copyright @ 2014. Laurence King Publishing. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/18/2019 1:53 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES AN: 926193 ; Coates, Kathryn, Ellison, Andy.; An Introduction to Information Design Account: undeloan.main.ehost152 Chapter 6 Diagram showing the process of the News Knitter project. This details gathering the data, analyzing and generating the patterns from it, and fi nally sending that information to the knitting machine to produce the garments. Taking inspiration from the world around you Information design is no diff erent from other design disciplines: it is a creative endeavour that has a rational outcome. Inspiration is key to any creative activity, but it does not come about through divine intervention. Designers naturally tend to be curious individuals; this curiosity can be benefi cial as they can take inspiration from areas other than graphic design. If you keep an open mind you may fi nd that the past and the present off er a rich source of inspiration for designs. Art, fi lm, culture, music, architecture, sculpture, furniture and fashion all infl uence how we view the world. In turn, they provide us with visual shapes, forms, colours, textures, type forms and organizational structures, if you look closely enough. Taking inspiration: News Knitter One such project that takes inspiration from an unusual source is that of News Knitter. This piece of data visualization by Mahir M. Yavuz and Ebru Kurbak at the University of Art and Design in Linz, Austria, started as a quest for an alternative medium to envisage live data streams. They realized that text and imagery designs on clothes were quite common. They asked themselves, ‘How can ephemeral information, which is generated, absorbed and evaluated by real people on a daily basis, be materialized, attached back to the physical body and enter urban daily life?’ HINTS & TIPS Copyright @ 2014. Laurence King Publishing. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/18/2019 1:53 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES AN: 926193 ; Coates, Kathryn, Ellison, Andy.; An Introduction to Information Design Account: undeloan.main.ehostExperimentation and inspiration for the design process 153 Top: The garments on display at Ars Electronica Festival in Linz in 2007. The exhibition consists of ten unique sweaters that are produced as sample outputs of the News Knitter project. Using online global or local Turkish news from a particular day or a time period generated the patterns of the sweaters. Above: Garments being produced in Istanbul using Shima Seiki’s computerized fl at knitting machines. The key idea was to translate digital data into the physical world. Since all digital information is in the form of binary code consisting of just 1s and 0s, the information can be readily converted into an analogue format via a piece of software. The project uses the form of knitted garments, in this case sweaters, as an alternate way to present and visualize large amounts of data. Through the means of knitting, digital information is visualized as a three-dimensional tactile item. Ebru and Mahir have commented, ‘Knitting builds up a meaningful whole from a mass of strings, just like information networks of virtual space are made up from digital bits. Knitting is very diff erent to printing, as it has a structural order that can be constructed and deconstructed at any time.’ Fashion is always looking at other disciplines such as architecture and pattern for inspiration. In this instance, the tables have been turned and it is the information designers fi nding inspiration in the pattern and make-up of the fashion item. Copyright @ 2014. Laurence King Publishing. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/18/2019 1:53 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES AN: 926193 ; Coates, Kathryn, Ellison, Andy.; An Introduction to Information Design Account: undeloan.main.ehost154 Chapter 6 Top: Sweater showing a typographic pattern, generated using the point size of the text to show a story’s popularity among global news items. Above: Sweater showing a graphical pattern, generated by the popularity of news items and particular keywords. The frequency of these keywords denotes the colour and scale of the shapes used to depict them, in this case, a plus sign or bar. The project takes live data streams of news stories around the world and translates them into a pattern to be used in the construction of the garments. The nature of the data streams means the patterns generated are all unique and unpredictable. The software Processing (see Chapter 5) takes information from live news feeds from the internet, fi lters them and then converts the results into diff erent visual patterns, both graphical and typographic. Typographic patterns are composed according to their time of publication, point size of headline and popularity. Graphical patterns are generated by the popularity of the news items and particular keywords. The frequency of these keywords denotes the colour and scale of the shapes used to depict them – in this case, a plus sign or bar. Once the patterns have been generated, a knitting machine is used to produce the fi nal items of clothing. Each sweater is the culmination and interpretation of a specifi c period or day. The designers used online global news or local Turkish news to generate the patterns. The fi nal presentation of these garments was through an exhibition shown at the Ars Electronica Festival in Linz in 2007. Ten unique sweaters were produced as sample outputs of the News Knitter project. Following this fi rst exhibition, News Knitter was exhibited all around the world, including at the electronic arts festivals Siggraph and Isea. This project proves that you shouldn’t be afraid to seek stimulation from unusual or unrelated sources. Although you may have to adapt or compromise your interpretation of them within the design process, the resulting solution turns out to be more engaging and unique if you look beyond the obvious places for inspiration. Copyright @ 2014. Laurence King Publishing. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/18/2019 1:53 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES AN: 926193 ; Coates, Kathryn, Ellison, Andy.; An Introduction to Information Design Account: undeloan.main.ehostExperimentation and inspiration for the design process 155 Guidelines on designing with information KISS Keep it Simple, Stupid (KISS). This guide is about simplifying elements and only including the essentials. This is so the audience is guided to the important data and not confused by any unnecessary information. FOCUS Select a particular element or elements to provide a focal point. That way it is easier for the viewer to decipher the message. If possible, visualizations of data should: • Have a clear purpose, such as a description, comparison or contextualization. • Show the data and allow the audience to think about what the data means and not how it was made. • Don’t distort the information or mislead. • Permit the viewer to uncover several layers of data from a broad overview to specifi c detail without confusing. • Let the user compare diff erent facts or statistics. • Allow the audience to remember the data or facts clearly. • Appreciate the user’s intelligence. Some ideas on fi nding inspiration Look beyond your own subject area for inspiration (architecture, art, music, philosophy, nature). Be aware: engage with politics, culture and news. Know your subject: designers past and present, the way they work, their attitudes, opinions and approaches. Record your experiences: listen, photograph, collect, observe and explore. Travel: inspiration can be found on the journey, not just at the destination (international or local); a ticket (the paper, colour or type); a conversation with a fellow passenger; the type of people you observe getting on or off the bus at diff erent points; how and where they sit and what they do while in transit; the environments you travel through; the signs/typography you see outside the windows. Sometimes the mundane can provide great inspiration and fascination. Most importantly: be curious. Some ideas on experimentation Be open-minded and willing to explore diverse design directions. This may lead you to discover new and interesting ways to communicate, as well as shaping your own practice in unexpected ways. Explore the potential of materials, media, formats and technologies within your design process. Get your hands dirty; don’t just talk or sketch what you might do: do it! Don’t be frightened of trying out new things; working beyond your comfort zone will ensure your practice evolves and improves. Try out diff erent approaches within your design process; ideas can be enhanced and communication improved by the selection of the most interesting and eff ective media, materials and format. HINTS & TIPS Copyright @ 2014. Laurence King Publishing. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/18/2019 1:53 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES AN: 926193 ; Coates, Kathryn, Ellison, Andy.; An Introduction to Information Design Account: undeloan.main.ehostCASE STUDY Inspiration for the design process Project: Wayfi nding and signage for Great Ormond Street Hospital, London Design: Landor Associates, London Overview For more than 150 years, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children (GOSH) has been one of the world’s leading children’s hospitals, off ering the highest levels of medical care. Over that time the hospital has grown to encompass many buildings across one central London site, all of which make it very diffi cult for visitors, patients and staff to fi nd their way around. Due to a major redevelopment program that took place in 2012, GOSH felt it was the perfect opportunity to review their wayfi nding and signage strategy. GOSH approached Landor back in 2008, and a small team volunteered to work on the project. Landor’s offi ce was then located nearby, so the designers were able to get on-site quickly and often, enabling them to get a feel for the full extent of the hospital. A number of the Landor team had friends or relatives who had been patients at GOSH, so the team were able to understand the emotional needs all the more quickly. Approach Hospitals can be lonely, scary places, especially when you’re a child. It can be hard to fi nd your way around, and even harder to fi nd a place to belong. The brief was to provide a theme, naming solution and guidelines for the fl oors and wards, to aid wayfi nding. It needed to interest children of all ages, families and staff and have long-term appeal. The hospital’s philosophy, ‘the child fi rst and always’, was at the heart of the strategy. There needed to be a theme that everyone could relate to, yet would be fun for children. With naming, the designers had to be creative while adhering to strict criteria – no negative cultural connotations, not too abstract, and be simple for non-English-language speakers to pronounce. The designers drew inspiration from the natural world – a theme that was already established within the hospital and one that gave the team the richness and diversity to create a captivating environment. Copyright @ 2014. Laurence King Publishing. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/18/2019 1:53 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES AN: 926193 ; Coates, Kathryn, Ellison, Andy.; An Introduction to Information Design Account: undeloan.main.ehostCopyright @ 2014. Laurence King Publishing. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/18/2019 1:53 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES AN: 926193 ; Coates, Kathryn, Ellison, Andy.; An Introduction to Information Design Account: undeloan.main.ehost158 Chapter 6 The team faced the challenge of producing a scheme that succeeded in the practical sense but that also appealed to the visitors/patients (the audience) who had to navigate the environment. The patients at GOSH range from newborn to 18 years old. Landor needed to create characters that would appeal to very young children – simple, recognizable shapes – but that also had an attitude and an aesthetic cool that would appeal to the older age group. As such, they tried to ensure that the animals had enough character to be unique to GOSH, but off ered plenty of opportunity for people to project their own thoughts and stories onto them. In the end the team developed some rules of thumb: distinctive silhouettes that would work well as signage icons and also engage very young children, nothing overly abstracted to ensure recognition. They enjoyed adding small details and behaviours to the characters that would engage older children and adults. Outcome The new theme and wayfi nding system provide clear direction in ways children understand, and animal characters appealing to all ages of the hospital’s patients provide therapeutic distraction throughout the journey. Not just how to get there, but entertainment, education and a community of friends. Landor split fl oors into natural habitats, from living in the oceans (lower ground fl oor) to living in the skies (top fl oor). The work has had a positive response from patients and families and the client is delighted with the new system, which will be implemented throughout the hospital as new buildings open. Above left: Great Ormond Street wayfi nding system, showing how the habitats are used on the ascending fl oors from oceans on the lower ground to skies on the fi fth fl oor. Left: Pictograms showing the various animals used for the ward names. The use of imagery means that visitors and patients can fi nd their way easily without having to rely on text. Opposite: The combination of traditional wayfi nding system and expressive illustrative elements makes the environment pleasant as well as functional. Copyright @ 2014. Laurence King Publishing. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/18/2019 1:53 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES AN: 926193 ; Coates, Kathryn, Ellison, Andy.; An Introduction to Information Design Account: undeloan.main.ehostExperimentation and inspiration for the design process 159 Copyright @ 2014. Laurence King Publishing. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/18/2019 1:53 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES AN: 926193 ; Coates, Kathryn, Ellison, Andy.; An Introduction to Information Design Account: undeloan.main.ehostCASE STUDY Visual mapping Project: Innovative approaches to information design research Design: Dr Alison Barnes Overview Dr Alison Barnes is a practising designer and senior lecturer at the University of Western Sydney in Australia. She completed her PhD at the London College of Communication in London in 2011. Her thesis focused on the potential of interdisciplinary collaboration between graphic designers and cultural geographers, and in particular the communicative possibilities of typography and graphic design when used in relation to the understanding and representation of place. Alison’s work centres on exploring notions of everyday life and place through print-based graphic design. By everyday life, she means the kind of daily routines or things that we tend to take for granted. For her, these seemingly inconsequential events or items are fascinating. Whether it is a favourite ornament on a Below: The design of the grid and the setting of the typography have been developed conceptually. The grid is modular, designed in response to the notion of a collection being the sum of several parts. In places this is used in such a way to reference meaning within the text; for example, in the section of the essay that references collectors, the text is set in small blocks that begin to fi ll the page. At the end of the book, the text begins to break out of the grid, resembling a collection of separate, disconnected lines, to refl ect the idea that on death, possessions that once held meaning more often than not simply revert to becoming inconsequential junk. mantelpiece or the recycling of unwanted household goods, there is always a story waiting to be revealed. These stories, and the work that develops through them, are not driven by a commercial perspective, but by Alison’s own personal interest. However, that is not to say that she would describe her work as ‘self-indulgent’. Copyright @ 2014. Laurence King Publishing. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/18/2019 1:53 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES AN: 926193 ; Coates, Kathryn, Ellison, Andy.; An Introduction to Information Design Account: undeloan.main.ehostApproach One of Alison’s key motivations is to explore the potential within graphic design to communicate information or stories in ways that engage the reader in an interactive space of exploration. She is also keen to develop a broader idea of what the design process encompasses, and specifi cally the research aspect of that process. As a student, one is encouraged to research the brief, especially at the start of a project. However, often that goes no further than using methods such as searching the internet or library for information about the subject matter, the target audience or other examples of design work that relate to the aesthetics or style of product or artifact needing to be designed. While Alison does use secondary methods like these, she also likes to ‘get out there’, to site herself within the research, which enables her to develop a diff erent perspective. By walking, photographing, taking notes, or just talking to people she builds up a range of diff erent types of information, which she then uses to develop content for the work. These types of methods are often used in other subject areas and could be broadly defi ned as ethnographic. As a graphic designer, she fi nds crossing Above: Cultural probes are designed to provide inspirational responses from participants, rather than the kind of information one would get from a traditional survey or questionnaire. Here, the pack includes a disposable camera, questions on postcards, a journey log, a recipe sheet and a memory sheet. However, the pack can be designed in relation to each project, so the contents can vary. The fact that the tasks are often quite creative, or more interesting than simply answering questions on a sheet of A4 paper, engages the participants in the research and makes the researchers seem less remote. The packs are not designed to be sent out in great numbers; this type of research is not about statistics and averages, but about more personal insights that can trigger an interesting idea for the development of the design work. borders into other academic territories, like cultural geography for example, particularly interesting. She likes to take on new ideas and research methods from outside of design and interpret them from her position as a graphic designer. In a sense, she becomes something of a bricoleur, someone who constructs their approach using a range of diverse research methods specifi cally chosen to respond to the particular situation that is of interest. Copyright @ 2014. Laurence King Publishing. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/18/2019 1:53 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES AN: 926193 ; Coates, Kathryn, Ellison, Andy.; An Introduction to Information Design Account: undeloan.main.ehostAbove: Stuff also includes envelopes that contain ephemeral artifacts that the reader can handle; for example, old photographs, stamps, cigarette cards and handwritten cards and letters. Handling these objects creates a pause within the process of exploration of the book and enables the reader to refl ect not only on these objects, but also on similar objects that may relate to their own possessions and memories. Left: A book is essentially a collection of bound pages, and with limited-edition work it is easy to explore the potential of non-traditional materials. For example, Stuff includes perfumed drawer liners as pages, which bring a multi-sensory dimension to the reader’s experience, and glassine paper to protect the full-bleed photographs. These pages reference the type of materials one might fi nd in an older relative’s house, which could be used when storing precious possessions in drawers or compiling a traditional family photograph album. Copyright @ 2014. Laurence King Publishing. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/18/2019 1:53 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES AN: 926193 ; Coates, Kathryn, Ellison, Andy.; An Introduction to Information Design Account: undeloan.main.ehostExperimentation and inspiration for the design process 163 Interaction can be created through the use of interesting formats and binding. Here the pages are French folded, which creates a hidden pocket in each page. These have been used to position captions that relate to the photographs on the outside of some of the pages. The photographs are seemingly ordinary as far as the reader is concerned, but for the owner they are deeply meaningful possessions that contain important memories. The reader, therefore, has to literally search beneath the surface of the image to reveal the meaning that each item holds. The book includes four diff erent types of texts, each set in a diff erent typeface or type style. The reader has to navigate through these texts; they can be read separately, or drawn together to build a bigger picture of our relationship with our possessions. The two main texts, an essay about stuff , and a participant’s life story, are set perpendicular to each other so the reader has to literally shift their position when reading a diff erent viewpoint. Much information design these days seems to be defi ned by the use of coloured graphic elements drawn in Adobe Illustrator that represent facts and information (often numerical), presented in large poster format. Alison fi nds this kind of work beautiful, but also fi nds herself regularly unable to sustain any interest beyond the immediate aesthetic impact it off ers. In her work, she likes to engage with elements including language, typography, paper stock, folding and format to produce graphic design that attempts to go beyond this type of skeletal landscape of statistics. She likes to interpret and design with information in a way that off ers the reader a more ‘open’ experience. Rather than ‘close down’ the information and suggest there is one correct reading, she prefers to edit and design with it in a way that enables the reader to become a more active participant in the process of engaging with the information. Sometimes this could be by using materials that engender a multi-sensory experience, with smell and touch used alongside vision. It could be through the execution of the typography that is set within the pages so it off ers multiple reading paths through columns that run both vertically and horizontally. Within the design of books, it could perhaps be through format, by drawing the reader in to fi nd information hidden within French folds, gatefolds or books within books. It could even be through the inclusion of hidden ephemeral artifacts within the piece that the reader can then fi nd and handle. All of these types of interaction help place the reader within the story, to induce the use of a fuller range of senses that off er a more ‘experiential journey’, one where they not only refl ect on the information, images and stories contained within the set text, but also on how similar experiences or information impacts on, or is present in, their own lives. Outcome For Alison, information and inspiration can be found everywhere, even in the seemingly most insignifi cant places. The challenge is to work with the methods and processes of graphic design in such a way as to make the everyday as fascinating for the reader as it is for her; to reposition the ultra-ordinary as the extra-ordinary. That is the power of information design. Copyright @ 2014. Laurence King Publishing. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law. EBSCO : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 9/18/2019 1:53 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES AN: 926193 ; Coates, Kathryn, Ellison, Andy.; An Introduction to Information Design Account: undeloan.main.ehost